This is Jocobodcast number 141, with echo Charles and me, Jocob Willink.
Good evening, Jocob Willink.
Good evening.
March 15th, 1631.
Most loving and kind father and mother,
my humble duty remembered unto you,
trusting in God you are in good health,
and I pray, remember my love unto my brother Joseph,
and thank him for his kindness that I found at his hand in London.
I know loving father and I do confess
that I was an undutiful child unto you
when I lived there with you and by you,
for which I am much sorrowful and grieved for it,
trusting in God that he will guide me
that I will never offend you so anymore,
and I trust in God that you will forgive me for it.
My writing unto you is to let you understand
what a country this new England is where we live.
Here are a few Indians, a great part of them died this winter.
It was thought it was of the plague.
Here is Timber Good Store, and A. Corn's Good Store,
and here is Good Store of Fish,
if we had boats to go for it,
and lines to serve fishing.
People here are subject to diseases.
For there, for here,
200 odd have died of scurvy,
and of the burning fever,
and beside as many lie lame.
All Sudbury men are dead,
but three, and three women, and some children.
Here is no cloth to be had to make no apparel and shoes.
So I pray, Father, send me four or five yards of cloth
to make some apparel, and loving Father,
though I be far distant from you,
yet I pray you remember me as your child,
and we do not know how long we may subsist.
I pray, do not put away your shop stuff,
before I think that in the end,
if I live,
it must be my living,
for we do not know how long this plantation will stand.
God half-taking away the cheapest stud in the land,
Mr. Johnson, and the lady Arabela his wife,
which was the cheapest man of a state in the land,
and one that would have done most good.
So, Father, I pray, consider of my cause,
for here will be but a very poor thing,
no being without loving Father,
your help with provisions from Old England.
I thought to come home in this ship,
for my provisions were almost all spent,
but that I humbly thank you for your great love
and kindness in sending some provisions,
or else I should,
and mine, a bin half-famished.
But now I will,
if it please God, that I have my health,
I will plant what corn I can.
My wife remembers her humble duty unto you,
and to my mother, and my love to brother Joseph,
thus I leave you to the protection of Almighty God.
Watertown, New England,
and that is an un-signed letter.
From, as I said, 1631, so these are settlers
coming into New England,
the letters written back to Father in England,
and obviously written from a place called New England,
which is where I grew up,
and where I am in the woods of right now,
in Franklin County, Maine,
and we have a guest today that is also a New Englander,
a Gjitzu Black Belt, a business owner,
and a friend of mine,
by the name of Peter Roberts.
He's been on the podcast before,
so if you haven't listened to podcast 93 yet,
and you need to go get the backstory of how I met Peter,
and how this little deal got underway,
go listen to podcast 93,
and then you can come back here,
and listen to the rest of this one.
So here we go, Pete.
Welcome back.
Thanks for having me,
and I'm extremely honored to be back on,
and was a little bit nervous to come back on,
but after all you're rising,
and motivating and flanking me,
and after what you just read, I'm ready to go.
Yeah, we got a pretty easy compared to those guys,
holy shit.
And it's interesting because I live in Southern California,
Echo as we know is from Hawaii,
and what's the temperature variation in Hawaii?
In Hawaii?
In Hauai, how much does the temperature vary?
One degree, just kidding.
I don't know, 10. It's 20.
We're talking 10.
We're talking about 20.
In the past three days,
there was a 40 degree change here in the weather in Maine.
It went from like 90 to 50.
Yeah, absolutely gives you a false sense of hope.
One day actually took it.
These people that settled here,
clearly were some sturdy stock that came up here.
You think about what they went through
and leaving the comforts of England,
and what I was thinking about is it's not like these were woodsmen from England.
Right?
They weren't hunters from England.
I'm going to share some of them more.
But they were people from England from London,
and then they were all of a sudden surrounded by this.
And you can't prepare for,
like there's nothing you can do conditioning-wise
to prepare for this.
You get here and you survive.
And that's what they were doing.
Well, you're talking about like,
because his dad had sent him provisions.
That was his insurance policy.
You know, I mean, hey, here's what we can offer you.
And I never thought about on the other side of things
as a parent, like who knows what they had for work or jobs or who knows if they sent them everything they had.
And financially what they could afford to send their son to keep him alive in New England.
And you've got a pretty much figure that when your kid sails across the sea in 1631,
you are never going to see them again.
Right?
And you've got to figure you're never going to see them again.
Yeah.
That's got to be the thought.
All right.
So welcome back, like I said, now last podcast, obviously we talked about origin, boom.
And we talked about where it started, how it started,
the trials and tribulations to say at least that you went through getting it to that point.
But it's been a pretty, so you were on the podcast one year ago,
because we were up at this origin camp one year ago.
And now you're back on it again, but it's been a big year.
Been a huge bit of, been a big year of growth for the company.
How many people?
We've grown by another 30 people.
So total, we're looking at 40 people.
Yeah.
And I think this time last year we were, yeah, right around 12 to 15.
And you know what, is crazy.
I don't know if I told you this, this time last year, like I don't,
I don't get real stressed out.
This time last year we had the immersion camp.
Right.
We had the grand opening in the factory.
We had just moved 60,000 square foot factory into our factory.
Like two or three weeks prior.
And it was still moving into.
And there were some other things going on with business, whatever.
And I don't know if I told you this one night, I left camp during the, during camp.
I don't tell me that I left camp and went home.
I was by myself and my family was still here.
And I was laying them bad.
And I couldn't, I couldn't get to sleep.
And I just felt really weird.
Like my, my body felt weird.
And all of a sudden my heart, I felt like it was beating through my chest.
And I was like, well, what is going on?
I'm going to come to find out how things I had to attack.
Never had it in my life.
I haven't had one sense.
And there was more going on.
So what does that actually mean?
I don't even know what that whole dude.
I had never, I sounds like some echo.
30, 30 years.
You're cruising through it.
Right.
You mean 38 years old.
And it was like, I don't know what brought it on.
I think there was a lot of, so what does that actually mean?
So it means you're, your blood, your whole structure goes up.
And scientifically, I don't know.
All I know is it was like, I think you're going to tell me hard attack.
No, dude.
I had, and I was like, whoa, and I just, man, I know.
So how do you know what was an anxiety attack?
I told somebody what happened.
And then they said, that was an anxiety attack.
I was like, okay, I'm not having one of those again.
That was because we took down two elephants instead.
Do you think that's the most stress you've ever been then?
No.
I mean, I, again, I don't feel like it was, no.
I mean, no, not a body of clothes.
I mean, what do you think brought it on?
I think it was a little bit of the unknown of what's to come.
Now, this is, now it just got interesting because you're sitting here complaining about the,
we're not complaining, but you're making a statement about the unknown.
Now imagine getting on board of all the wood and ship and saying,
across the country, that's, there's no pictures.
You don't know what this place looks like.
You have expectations.
You've heard about Indians.
Right.
With Tomahawk.
That's what you've heard about.
Right.
Yeah.
That's got to be stressful.
So that was sort of a point when we, when you were on last time,
it was at sort of everything was launching at one time, new factory,
yet all this stuff going on.
And the day after we recorded that podcast was what?
The day after I went home and slept that night,
we recorded the podcast.
Okay.
I remember sitting in the factory that night in a friend of mine drove by late night
and we were recording and all the lights were on in the factory.
And what it was, it was just crazy.
You know, the tri-de-de- old New England church bells in the background.
It's just an awesome, awesome time.
And that kind of like got me to erase that, my body only calmed down at that point
and I reset and good.
Never had it before and never had it after.
Well, I'll tell you what, it was crazy from my perspective.
Is when we were first thinking up and we were buying the building.
Right?
And so I'm kind of, you know, hey cool, we're buying a building
and we got this going on and then I get up there and I go in the building
and the building is, it's pretty big, you know?
And I'm thinking, well this is a big, pretty big building that we have.
And do we need, I'm thinking, you know, it's myself,
do we need this big of a building?
I'm thinking myself, well, do we get a little crazy with this building?
And then I come back now one year later and we have two small of the building in one year.
And so instead of there being four people, five people,
stitching at a time, everyone's stitching.
And there's machines are filled.
The shipping areas completely filled with product going out.
That's a lot of, that's, that's like an exponential.
How much more are you shipping a day now compared to a year ago?
We are shipping probably 10 times as much right now.
And it's growing daily exponentially.
Wow.
You know, the thing is is like just to frame this, just to frame this, right?
It's, it's a fallout shelter.
I mean, that's what we bought was a fallout shelter.
It was built during the Cold War.
This thing is reinforced.
Like when they brought that 800 amp power in,
because we had to, we had to bring three phase power in.
They had to change the transformers because we were sucking all the power from the pound.
So they literally, and it was pretty real.
And so I was like negotiating with the power company, central man power.
And you know, I get them up there and I tell them,
I vision getting by out.
Like because they, it's a company.
They're going to negotiate a little bit.
Otherwise, we'll put up solar.
Exactly.
So they came in.
They put all the new transformers on on the, the pole,
you know, and the ran in the building.
And then the electrical company, the electricians who were friends,
also of us and they're like,
they're like, okay, we got to bore through the concrete.
And they, they barely were able to bore through that concrete.
I have a, I have a, what do you call it?
A cylinder.
They took two cylinders out of the wall.
And it was like that was so hard.
Because, you know, concrete gets harder as it ages.
But it is the towns, the factory is the towns fall out shelter.
I don't know if I've told you that.
No, when you, so when you go down the stairs, it says fall out shelter.
Yeah, I have saw that, but I thought it was,
I didn't know that was the purpose of the whole build.
Originally, sent, originally the power company built it.
But because it was built during the cold war, it became the fall out.
We tried to get all the tax breaks to put the fall out shelter.
Probably something like that.
Probably.
So you added 40 people, how many products?
I mean, it is just as far as products.
I mean, we're adding monthly, you know,
I mean, nutritionally on the nutritional side.
And with our partnership, like in terms of the jockel products,
which have, you know, been ridiculously awesome for the masses,
along with some of the new stuff we're doing and jiu-jitsu and on the lifestyle and the things
as we grow, the vision and we grow, and we bring our message proliferate our message to the masses.
You know, we're just, we're providing people with what they want, you know?
And, you know, what's funny is some of that providing them with what they want is
this kind of a neat thing.
Like, we had Charlie Breneman here, the Spanard,
used to fight in UFC Big UFC fighter,
and he came into the factory yesterday and he walked in the back door
and he walked in 10 steps and he stopped.
And he's a pretty cerebral guy, you know?
I mean, you don't get to the top level in the UFC.
If you're not a cerebral person like that.
And he looked at me and he said, hey, he said, hey,
he said, hey, Pete, you told me there were no stupid questions
because that's what I always preface everything with.
I say, no, no, shoot, he's like, why do I feel the way I feel?
And I was like, what do you mean he's like?
Like a little bit shocked and confused.
And I said, well, that's because it's natural
to feel that way when you haven't seen people building products
with their hands and a factory environment.
We've only heard about it through the television or books
because it all has gone away.
And our generation were about the same age.
You know, we didn't see it, you know?
Maybe we're kids as it was just leaving.
And he was just like, man, this is just incredible.
You know, just couldn't wrap his head around
and he was just wandering around that factory up and down like,
holy cow, man, this is, and once you see it,
you feel it.
It's a physical change.
You know, it's like when you have, and this is might be accessible
when you have your first child and you see your child
is like this chemical reaction.
Man, when you walk into a factory where there is people
working with their hands and working together
to bring this thing to life, it's, it's bringing something
to life in a different way and another parallel.
So it's awesome to see.
At what point did factory get a negative connotation?
You think I have my own theories which I'll share.
Please do.
Because when people go, oh factory work, they think, oh,
that's bad.
You're sitting there doing some menial task over and over again.
That's what some people think of factory work.
And I'll agree with you.
And I bet you, that is part of what Charlie was feeling
when he walked in there, what you think of a factory
is not what a factory is, especially in our case.
Right.
And they're portrayed negatively.
But it's all education.
And here's what happened in that letter.
He said, we don't have any textiles to make a parallel
and clothing.
Or probably leather yet,
to make shoes and accessories.
Things you need for survival.
So New Englanders were forced into a position.
And we talked about like Hans and daylight, right?
They had their hands and they had daylight.
And they had whatever they brought for livestock to be able to build
their farms.
They cleared the fields by hand.
They cut the trees by hand.
And if you've ever stumped a tree by hand,
that's an absolute nightmare.
One tree could take a full day to stump it, to pull the
stomps and roots out of the ground, to build a field to have
the cows to raise the cattle.
Have you stumped a tree by hand?
Oh, yeah.
What's that process?
You've got to do it.
So to stump a tree by hand, you have to,
you've got to treat down.
You dig around like all the roots.
And then you take an axe and you've got the roots as low as you can.
And you pull the stump up.
And the stump is massively heavy because it's the wood.
And it's all the organics that have grown around it.
It comes up with it.
It's a challenge.
You have never done that without a machine.
With how to machine, which they didn't have.
Yeah.
You know, and so there was this necessity to live.
And it, okay, we have to be self-sufficient.
We can't rely on provisions from England.
We have to become self-sufficient.
So the direction and the focus of the people in,
as a union was amazing when people come together for a common cause.
We know that's an amazing thing.
And as immigration happened, you know, the French, the Irish,
and everything else, they all came together to build these factories
to harness the power of New England's rivers.
And they had to.
And, but what happens as after had to now you have it.
And over the generations, it's expected and you become complacent.
And complacency is what tore us down.
Because we didn't fight hard enough to keep our factors here.
We just didn't.
We didn't fight hard enough.
Why?
Because we're complacent, you know, everyone's making a great wage.
And this is 150 years later.
The textile mills and the spinning mills and the dihouses.
And the, you know, the boot companies and the leather factories and the tanneries.
And all of those things were right around here, right around this area.
But it becomes expected.
And it went away.
You know, in a way, in the early 2000s, late 90s.
So the timeline touches us, right?
But didn't have impact as it did on some of the older folks.
Did we get sold a bill a good at some point that factory, like as people were trying to move factories overseas.
And they could save money.
Did we get sold a bill of goods that, hey, factory work isn't what you want to be doing?
Well, what I think is that through the complacency, you know, like if you look at our grandparents, for instance,
which they told us the stories.
Hey, I used to go to the mill when I was eight, I go to the tannery.
I pulled tax out of the hides. That was my grandfather.
His mother worked in the low spinning mills, right?
So she was in low Massachusetts and she worked on the spinning mills.
You know, making the, the wool yarn or the cotton yarn to weave the tax dials.
She actually used to, at that, at the end of the shift, she would sweep up all the excess wool.
She'd go home and she'd spin it by hand and she'd make blankets and stuff with it, which we, we have one in the family, which is pretty cool.
So you hear these stories, but you heard it as through the eyes of hardship.
So immediately you're thinking that this is a hard life.
So that's how we were taught.
And so the way that we were brought up more so is that you need to go to college to get an education, so you don't have the hardship.
Factory work now is a totally different beast.
It's not like, back then yes, eight years old, bare feet working.
That's what happened.
And, and I think that the mindset, the gritty mindset, I think what was,
what was, what's trying to take place was that kind of the hard work and work ethic and grit, you know, trying to be passed down to us, our, our parents and then us.
But what didn't happen was the experiential knowledge of it. So you just heard it.
And you know how it is when you don't experience and experience something you really don't know.
And we became complacent and then the jobs left.
They've just left, you know, trade opened up and they left.
I mean, big business taken away.
And the reverberation.
I don't think that right there is, you know, when people complain about the corporate, you know, corporate making decisions.
That's what they're complaining about.
Is that you're not, because it's true.
At a corporation, you can make a decision 100% based on bottom line.
And unfortunately, those aren't, they're usually, or you can be tempted to make bad strategic decisions.
And even though you might win in the short term for this quarter or next quarter or this fiscal year, in the long run, what do you end up with?
Exactly. What do you end up with?
And I'm not going to blame it on, let's say, the owners and administrators and the folks above.
Right? And I'm not going to blame it on the workers.
I'm going to blame it on the detachment and to take, you know, what, what, what, what, what, what, the whole thing you do with leadership, right?
The culture became bad.
And I'm going to tell you why I believe this, our, our third loom we bought.
We, after we discovered the first two, I discovered this Italian guy.
His name was Mario.
And I, I just started calling people trying to find like, there was this mill in Sanford, Maine, a huge mill, like a million square feet.
And I heard it, I heard it shut down.
And I called the town. And I was like, hey, I heard about this mill. Somebody said there might be some equipment in there.
Some old equipment, blah, blah, blah.
And they're like, oh, yeah, this guy, Mario owns it.
Maybe you should try calling the tax assessor.
I said, okay, so I called the tax assessor.
And like, yeah, yeah, we, we know this person Mario, yeah, he, he shut the mill down.
And we have some contact information for him, but it was very cold.
And I was like, okay, so he gave me the number and I called and I left a message.
And I said, hey, my name's Pete Roberts.
I'm trying to bring textiles back to Maine.
And I'd like to talk to you about your mill.
And he called me back, and he's an old guy, and he's a Italian.
And the Italians are the ones that make the really good looms for long, long, long time.
You know, about a hundred years, two hundred years, whatever it was.
And his family had been in weaving and in textiles for a hundred years.
And he said to me, Pete, he said, let me tell you something.
And his Italian accent.
He said, we didn't want to shut the doors.
He said, but I did.
He said, I shut the doors, I locked it up, and I walked away.
And every single piece of machinery is still in that mill.
I said, what?
I'm getting chills.
Every single piece of machinery is still in that mill.
He said, if you can do something about that, I'm willing to work with you.
I said, open the doors for me, man.
He goes, let me tell you something.
When I went to the town, when they basically wanted to take advantage of me,
take advantage of me on the tax base.
And I still had 40 people working there.
They wouldn't work with me.
He said, it wasn't me that wanted to strip it away.
It was a mixture.
He said, yeah, I had the shut the doors, because I was forced to.
They forced my hand.
The people didn't want to lose their jobs, but at the same time he said,
the people were basically putting pressure on him, right?
Like they're looking up like, hey, you can pay us more.
Hey, you can do this.
And then he said, when I went to the town, and they wouldn't help us with any of this,
he goes, what am I going to do?
Shut the doors and walk away.
So we have a people that's complacent.
We have a town that has a spec expects what they expect and is inflexible.
And you put the owner in a position where he needs to react.
He needs to make a decision.
And his decision was shut the doors and walk away.
That's what he did.
You want me to tell that story about that mill?
Yeah.
It's dude.
We get there.
And he's like, call this guy, Jim.
He's at the mill.
He is the night watcher, whatever.
He's the caretaker for the property.
And I met Jim and he said, the big white beard is sold in gentlemen.
And he used to make the warps that won't be fabric.
And he was very protective of everything, very protective.
And you know what's funny is history channel.
They sent a crew with us for this.
They were going to do a TV show way back.
And anyways, so we have this whole film crew.
And we have this author show us here sometimes.
It's crazy.
So he unlocks.
So it's all overgrown grass.
The windows are smashed.
The bricks are basically like falling apart.
I mean, it's just deteriorated.
And he opens door and walks in in the smell of years of no heat.
And the cold and the heat and the cold.
Everything was peeled and all the floorboards were punky and popped up.
Nail sticking up and everything.
But we walked in that mill and it was exactly set up the way he left it.
I'm talking huge cotton processing machines made out of wood with needles to separate
to card the cotton to pull the organic out.
I'm talking a I would say a football field long spinning machines to spin yarn.
And then Jim after I started talking to him about what we're doing.
Because he was just cold.
He was just like what number, what number loom were you getting from him?
That was number three.
And the warp.
So we he in then I saw like six looms on the floor.
And I was like, you guys have a loom.
See, he's like, let me show you something.
And were they rusted with a broken worn or were they in okay condition?
They had not been run for 20 years, I think.
So they were in okay condition because they were between floors.
So the top floor was just destroyed.
And you know all those bins we have in the pro shop.
They came from that mill.
All those camispins.
So that top floor was destroyed.
There was just bird's nest and shit everywhere, right?
All over everything.
And then they went in the middle floors.
But he's like, let me show you something.
I'm like, okay.
And we follow him down this staircase and I'm like, this is going to like murder us or something.
I don't think.
What is going on?
We walk in and he pulls his flash light up like this.
And it's like a layer of dragons.
There's got to be 67 the looms in the basement of this place.
And that's where we pulled the shit out.
What does it loom cost right now?
How brand new loom?
If we were going to go brand new probably 120 maybe.
You know, and where'd you pay for loom number three?
Loom number three.
I negotiated 25 hundred bucks.
And we'll have you buy the rest of those.
We should.
Dude, it's just to move on.
It's like, they're 9,000 pounds each.
Yeah.
They're massive.
Joe Joe ran the show.
There's more juggle like the other.
Yeah, we did.
Double close.
We, I told the, so anyways, we, when you go shit deal,
I spent, I was like 10 grand and we got like a few different things.
All massive machines, the warpur with the creal.
We got a loom, uh, the, in the pro shop, the, the, the backwinding machine that I refurbished.
That came out of there.
And the most important thing we got out of that place was the punch card machine to punch the patterns to go in the looms.
That's in my office.
Yeah, that's a cured.
We've got to walk in my face.
So that's, that's how you actually decide what, how that loom is going to weave together the material.
So it looks like dragon weave looks like exactly.
So that's, that's the, that's the deal.
I mean, that place was, and I'm still like trying to work with Mario to get more equipment.
But yeah, let's trick you.
Okay, so you've been, you were kind of doing that.
You've been doing that.
Obviously once we met, you know, you're at 12 people, you're growing.
You, you, you obviously, I gave you a copy of Extreme Ownership.
You read that. How is that, is that played a role? How is that played a role?
Because I know you've told me it's played a role.
Where did you see yourself going, okay, you know what?
Here's something I need to do different.
And I've said this, I said this on an interview the other day that, you know, someone was talking about what kind of, what they say,
background check did I do on you before we started working together?
Right.
And is that what there was that there was no due diligence?
What kind of due diligence?
And I, you know, I was explaining how we spent a lot of time talking.
And via Skype and what I was really listening to and hearing was, you know, you weren't making excuses about anything.
Well, you know, you explained to me, hey, we tried to do this.
I didn't know what I was doing.
I had to learn that.
Then I tried to do this other thing and guess what?
I didn't have enough capital.
I had to figure out another way.
You weren't saying, you didn't blame anybody else for anything.
I mean, and, you know, we're, we're right now in a great point with origin.
And you weren't always at a great point.
I mean, you've had, you've had to do whatever you bit struggling business had to do.
Or small business has to do that is struggle to grow.
And when I talked to you, you, you, you already had the attitude of taking ownership of everything you could.
But I know in talking to you that you've also pulled a lot of stuff out and said, oh, yeah, this is, this is had an impact.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, there's tons of stuff.
There's tons of stuff.
You know, first of all, what you jutsu has done for me is expose me.
It's what it does.
It exposes your weaknesses.
So you get better. And that mindset that you jutsu mindset, I like being exposed because our brains have changed.
Right?
And I think that's what makes this work.
Like if, if, if, if, if, if I, if I don't see the weakness and somebody exposes it,
the first thing I do is feel like a schmock for a second,
but then I'm like, okay, well, show me how I can get better.
You know, when there's so many times I've like texted you late night, hey, man, can you talk?
Can you help me out with this issue? Can you help me out with this problem?
You know, because leadership for me has only come through playing sports and then running business.
Right?
I wasn't in war.
I didn't see the worst of humanity and how decisions can affect someone living or dying.
I didn't see that, you know, and I, it's a whole not a level, you know?
And knowing that you had had and had those leadership skills that were, you know, that you conditioned to,
is really what it was.
You know, I just knew there was another level.
And so when I actually listened to extreme ownership for the first time, you know,
I was just humbled by that, you know, by the book.
The two things for me that really, and of course, I went to the monster too, and I'd recommend if you're in business,
any leadership position, regardless of industry.
Go.
Like, and it'll be the most valuable thing you do for yourself.
Like, it's hard to explain, but I can tell you being there in the presence, first of all, warriors,
but also their stories is powerful.
You know, connecting with them on a personal level outside of the monster, that's powerful.
Decentralized command change the game for us.
Man, you know, I didn't think I was a control freak.
I just, I was always like, you need to bring me a better idea.
It's got to be better than my idea, right?
I will go with anybody's idea.
It's got to be better though.
It's got to make more sense, and I'll switch.
I'll shut it down and switch immediately.
But you know what I found out is I wasn't giving people an opportunity to give me their idea.
We had a great culture, we had a great culture, but I wasn't giving them the opportunity to be leaders.
I had kind of nurtured a kind of, I will help you decide.
I'll help you.
You know, you come to me and I'll help you.
And once I shifted that, and I actually had a lot of our managers and leaders,
listen to extreme ownership, and I'll tell you what, the ones who listened,
I knew they would become leaders, and the ones who gave me slack about it,
I knew there's another path for them.
Because you have to humble yourself to listen, and then not only listen, but apply it.
So, then I've got a little off course with the decentralized command too.
I've given a little too much, and you know, because I can't hear your shot of fire.
Which is the whole other thing, right?
But then I've had to come at me like, people make decisions, but not be the right decisions.
I don't want to have to bite my tongue about it. At the same time, I've had the leadership skewed,
you know, like, decentralized command can be skewed from the other side.
Well, this person needs to do this, or sometimes, like, you know, sometimes you just need to make a decision.
Well, you can take that, and you can say, well, I'm just going to make a decision every time.
No, that's not what we're talking about here.
You know, so decentralized command for us changed the game.
Well, you wouldn't be able to do, you would not be able to do anything that you're doing right now.
If you were trying to control everything that the way you were a year and a half, two years ago, impossible.
Exactly. And the growth.
And I would say that the transition between growth phases, which is a lot of transition,
has been so smooth because we're all on the same page.
You know, we're all on the same page.
And winning it all costs, which is a big one for me, because that's where you got a completely
doop your ego.
We've had some conversations about that.
Yeah, well, and interesting. I talked about winning it all costs at the most, or I haven't really exposed it to everyone.
But, you know, the basic concept is that when we say winning it all costs,
we think of that from an attitude of being completely aggressive moving forward,
not ver stopping no matter what happens.
I'm going to execute the plan that I came up with.
And that sounds good.
And it gets everyone all fired up.
But the reality is, and I'm not a fact you and I were just talking about this.
Somebody here at camp said, basically, is it okay to quit?
I feel like I don't want to quit, but I've got something going on.
Basically a guy, a great guy, hard worker, has a business, been running his business.
It was his goal was to get this business up and running a very hard business, a very labor-intensive business,
a very fickle business, agriculture.
And he's been grinding. He was at camp last year.
I talked to him all last year.
I remember I asked him a lot of questions about leadership and ownership and business, and all that.
He comes back this year and he came to me this morning.
And really, I think this, I told him this, this conversation that we had made it,
feel like it was worthwhile for me to come to camp because he said to me,
I feel like, is it ever okay to quit?
I know I'm not supposed to, he was in the Marine Corps.
We don't quit.
And I said, if you listen to all the podcast, then he goes,
yeah, and I go, because I answered this question.
I answered this question.
The question is, is it ever okay to quit?
And so you and I just had this conversation.
And you said, need direct reaction.
You read your, read your reactions.
No, you can never quit.
No, I come from the Seal teams.
Where our motto is actually never quit.
That's actually one of our mantras.
And then I said, okay, Pete, if you came up with a plan,
that was driving our business into the ground,
but you were just never going to quit.
Would that be good?
No, you're like, no, okay, there you go.
Yeah, that's a lot of it.
It does more trickster.
Yeah, well, trickster.
I'm a little trickster.
So, so that's the problem.
If you have something that is, that is like that,
that whether it's hey, I want you to charge,
singa, nest, or whether it's,
hey, I want you to continue to execute this plan,
or whether it's, hey, I want you to even something like this.
Hey, you should keep training hard, right?
Guess what?
My knees a little bit tweaked.
Don't quit.
Well, now you blow your knee out.
Right.
So, the fact of the matter is, sometimes you got to look at,
so then I said, okay, what is your long term strategic goal?
Like your actual strategic goal.
Because his goal was, the goal of his was not to build that business.
The goal of his was to be able to take care of his family
and be around his family and do something with his family
that he could carry on as a legacy.
That was his goal.
It wasn't working out.
The business part of it wasn't working out.
I don't know what he's going to do,
but I can tell you, I saw him an hour later
and he had a big smile on his face.
And I said, you feel lighter, don't you?
And he goes, yes, I do feel lighter.
That, thank you.
But the point is, not that he's necessarily going to stop,
but he's going to maybe shift his direction a little bit
or he's going to attack it with a different perspective.
He's going to do something different.
He realized, man, we talked about this in two, two all the time.
Yeah.
I just got done teaching the white belts.
I'm like, the knee shield, you're not going to go through it.
You can't go through it.
You cannot go through it.
It's humanly impossible.
You cannot go through the knee shield.
You have to go around it.
You have to go under it.
You have to back away from it.
You've got to do something else.
So if I say go through that knee shield
and you just go forward forward forward
and you never quit.
Guess how long you're going to be there.
Forever.
You can't physically move your hips on your hips.
Yes.
So this idea of like never quitting.
It's something that we have to be careful about.
We have to be careful that what we're not quitting is something strategic.
And we have to continually check that that strategy,
that strategic goal that we're moving towards is actually something that we don't.
I had this conversation with Dave several years ago about echelon front
and he was like, oh, you know, we got to expand.
And I said, yeah, absolutely, we got to expand.
And we were talking about how we were going to do it.
And we started looking at like how many gigs and how many numbers and how many things
and how many events and how many companies were going to be in.
And I said, let me ask you this.
Why do we want to expand in that manner?
Is that really what we want is to expand in that way.
And we thought about it.
And it's like, no, actually we want to do something a lot smarter than that.
So we quit.
Basically you adapted.
We adapted.
But we did we we adapted, but I mean to look at it in the blunt language,
I like, oh, we quit this direction.
But that's fine.
Now, let me too.
It is the we didn't quit.
We didn't quit the strategic goal of growing, of spreading the word,
of helping people learn, of bringing leaders up to their, their potential.
That's what the goal is.
The goal isn't, hey, we want to have X amount of clients.
We would rather have the clients that really adopt what we say,
that really absorb what we say, that we can really have an impact on.
That's what we're looking to do.
So yeah, those kind of things are important to consider.
And I know, I know that's some of the conversations that we've had about
winning at all costs.
So winning at all costs means sometimes you do things that on the surface,
they don't seem like winning moves.
I know.
You know, it's, it was crazy.
My wife read an extreme ownership.
She devoured it, but watch out now, boy.
Oh, man.
You know, and sometimes, you know, 99% of the time she applies it.
But sometimes she'll say to me, I just don't feel like playing your game today.
You ever heard that?
Not for my wife.
No.
Well, I mean, I work with my wife.
We have a great work.
And actually, that's something that we should talk about,
because you do have a great work in relationship with your wife.
I hear you on the phone.
And that is basically her saying, like, I don't know what she's trying to say,
but I do what you do in extreme ownership.
I'll do it.
Yeah.
With some of the toughest conversations will be like,
it's six o'clock or seven o'clock,
and she's still working to make sure we win it all costs.
She's actually physically shipping product with the rest of the team.
And she'll work to probably 10 to do that on occasion.
And I'll walk out and I'll be like, how's it going?
She's like good, and I'll be like, I haven't trained this week.
I was thinking about going to train.
And then she'll give me the look.
That's not me winning at all costs.
And it's kind of like one of those things you've got to balance,
like, what's the most important thing here to make happen?
But at the same time, when she's in the game,
she'll be like, I know you need that.
So I will handle this.
And then it's kind of like you scratch my back.
I'll scratch yours.
In the military, it's called a mutually supporting relationship.
Mutuality is what it's called.
You're going to take care of me this time.
And tomorrow, I got you.
Yeah.
You know, when you're all sore from you train last night,
guess what?
You can get in here and stay late night.
Exactly.
You'll do something relaxing.
But you know, there's occasions where like winning it all costs is like,
it really is sometimes you're just like thinking,
oh man, I have to, I've got a freaking do this, bro.
I've got to, I got it with you.
It's like, I'll go in my office and I'll sit down and I'll put my hands
on the desk and I'll just put my head down and close my eyes,
but like reset, go.
And then just go do it.
Yeah, just move.
I had this conversation with another camper up here.
That was like, you know, I love extreme ownership,
but one of my friends has had trouble with it.
And I said, oh, what type of trouble?
Have they had with extreme ownership?
Well, they're trying, he's trying to get his team to take ownership
and they're not taking ownership.
And I said, okay, more, expand.
And basically, it's like, oh, the team mess something up.
And he's like, you guys got to take ownership with it and fix it.
And in your mind, you're thinking, oh, I'm going to get them to take ownership.
That's the problem.
The real, just so everybody knows.
Yeah.
The real thing that you do is you say, oh, I see that you guys failed
on the project.
I obviously let you down.
I obviously didn't give you clear enough guidance.
I didn't explain it to you well enough.
I didn't give you the resources that you need.
I didn't, and you don't say this part,
I didn't micromanage you enough.
That's exactly.
Because when you start saying, okay, I'm going to come in.
I'm going to make sure we get that don't, hey, you know what?
I only met with you three times over three weeks during that project.
That's my fault.
Now we're going to meet every day because I want to make sure that we're tracking.
Yeah.
And if you do that, you can will stuff to happen.
I mean, you can make things happen through force of will.
And so in that situation where you get down there, you get to meet every day.
You're going to check at the end of the day.
You're going to make sure that we're making progress on the project.
That we're supposed to.
And your team now goes, oh, damn, we don't want this.
We're going to go back off.
And then you know what they just did?
They took ownership.
Exactly.
And you know what I have to be very careful of, though, is because of the fragility of human resources,
which are also in our culture, it's our family too, is saying the word failure.
You know, and, and I think the thing is, and where the transition happens is when you
understand that in what I'm trying to get, like a man to understand is that extreme ownership
is it's not a game.
It's actually a way of thinking.
And you really have to believe that.
So when you're saying, hey, I gave you too much.
I gave you, I gave you so much.
There's absolutely no way you could handle that.
I failed you by asking you to do that.
The words coming out of your mouth, you have to believe.
A lot of people will say it, but they don't believe it, and lately they don't believe it, totally.
And that is, that is the ego, and that is actually getting it, and you have to take yourself,
and you have to put yourself in their shoes.
And if you can't detach and do that, then you are playing the game.
You're playing the game, and it's not a game.
It's not a game.
And I've said this one before where someone says, you know, when I get in front of my team and I say,
hey, guys, this was my fault.
This happens.
And then someone on the team goes, yeah, it was your fault.
And you know, when I ask, oh, I ask groups, I'll ask companies that.
I say, what do you say to that?
And people get all like, they get confused.
They say, well, you should tell them about what the mistakes that they made.
So they can do it.
And it's like, no, what you actually say is, when someone, when you say, hey, this was my fault.
They say, yeah, it is your fault.
And you say, I know that's what I just said.
It is absolutely my fault.
Here's the mistakes that I made.
Here's what I'm going to do to fix them.
So we do better next time.
I usually just say, I won't let you down again.
I'll make sure this doesn't happen.
Yeah.
I was down there fixing a loon the other day.
You're dead.
You're about that?
No.
Our loon tech.
You know how you asked about when we first started working together, you're like, well, proud.
What if what if something happens to one of these old timers that helps you with the machinery?
And I was like, we find a way.
How many moving parts are on a loom?
There's got to be 10,000.
It looks like the most insane contraption that looks like when you look at one and you see it moving.
You think yourself, there's no way that this works.
There's millions of little like needles.
What are they?
A little hooks or something hooks.
It's a little crazy.
We were our so-called any our loom guy who got a set up with everything and re-ferbered everything.
And what I say, we bought a loom for 2500 bucks.
I mean, like, we got a frame for 2500.
It's like getting a car frame.
But now we're going to build a car.
So, you know, it costs money to get these things back up and going.
And most importantly knowledge, because we have to have all the parts machined from scratch that
They don't make anymore.
And then you spend 10 grand on parts that you hadn't machined and they don't work.
And that's why loon number three still down.
What you're saying?
You know, fairly such a great story.
So, those are work.
Yeah, we actually, on my podcast, we just talked about if we made the right decision.
You have to listen to that.
Did we make the right decision or should we have gone and gotten a note in span of
quarter million dollars or new looms and waited the six months for the build out to get the looms.
And so anyways, letting us sick.
And he's the old time or he used to work in the baits mill to weave, you know, the huge mill.
He was the one.
He got sick and I could tell that my team was, let's say, failing.
And that was one of those times recently.
That's about a month ago where I sat in my seat and I just kind of was like,
This isn't working.
And it's not going to work.
If you don't drag your ass downstairs into the bunker.
Into the fallout shelter because that's where these things are.
Into the dragons layer and fix it and show them there is a way to fix it.
Go hands on it.
So we went down there and we started stripping things apart completely apart.
And figuring it out.
And after a solid seven to 10 days,
we got it back up and running.
And you know what that did to that team at 21 year old?
Oh, I actually know what it did.
Go ahead.
No, you tell me.
Well, people ask me all the time, what can we do to make our team tighter?
And I say, if you want your team to be tighter, if you want to have better morale,
do hard things together.
Do hard things together.
It raises everyone's confidence.
It brings everyone together on the team.
It makes you feel like you got over something.
A lot of companies that I work with now.
Our companies that survived the economic downturn.
And they talk about it like they went to war.
And they survived and now we're tight and we're bros and nothing's ever going to
rest part.
Yeah, I'm getting the chills when you just thinking about that.
That recession was war on business.
Yeah.
The military units, what makes a military unit have morale?
Well, you put them through boot camp and they go through hard things together.
And then you take a special operations unit.
You put them through tougher training.
And it makes them even tighter.
And then when you take a unit, a conventional force unit or a spec option unit,
and you put them into combat, they're going to get even tighter.
And the harder the combat, the tighter they get.
So you and your crew spending seven days, 12 hour days,
trying to figure out this significant problem and overcoming it.
It brings you, it brings us tighter together.
And like you're 21 year old kid that's learning how to do this.
I don't know I'm calling the kid.
He's a man with a job, making stuff happen.
He feels, alright, I've got value.
I've got confidence.
I can, this machine, this machine doesn't run me.
I run this machine.
Exactly.
And you know what was funny is when?
Like there's a, people are looking at it.
People are looking for like, what's the, how are we going to solve this?
And I have this rule.
It's, it's basically ask me once, ask me twice, ask me a third time.
I'm doing something wrong.
And what had happened with the loom because I knew what a nightmare was going to be.
Is, I decentralized from it too much.
So they were in my office over the course of the first two to three days.
It might even been a week at least a dozen times.
So you're red flag for you need it.
You're too far detached from something is ask once you're not too far to doubt.
It's just just an issue.
Ask twice.
Details.
I left the detail.
Yeah.
Okay.
Here's a little bit more.
Third time.
Got to get them going.
Yeah.
Got to make something happen.
And that's just my own.
And I think that that helps like, just helps.
For sure.
Somebody, if I'm in a combat situation, someone calls me up and say, hey,
I'm saying, hey, Joaqua, we got movers over there and I'm like, no, we're good.
They call me again.
Hey, I think I see something.
No, there's nothing to be in track.
Hey, we got some situation down here.
Guess what?
I'm going to go find out what's going on.
And you know what the other thing is?
Like, what to that end is we were sitting in the golf cart together.
They didn't know I was in the phone with Jill.
And she called me and we're at camp right now.
And the emergency, or an emergency camp.
And she called me and she's like, hey,
the cover stitch, we're spending the sheeness down for you.
You know, our last, our last, the waistband.
And I said, okay, did you call Bill?
And she's like, yes, but he can't come in.
That's it.
Let me call him.
She said, okay, come.
Bill, can you come in?
I can't come into a one.
That's good enough.
But you can be there today.
So yes, I called Jill.
I said, hey, I need you to ask if Maggie, which is one of our stitches,
can stay late.
So that she builds going to come in and fix the machine.
So that she can get production done.
What does that do to Jill?
Let me dig a little deeper into that machine.
So when we showed up at the factory the other day, everything was back up and going
without Bill.
So at the same time, not that flank.
And I've learned a lot about flanking.
I would have driven over there.
I wouldn't let the session.
But showing her that somebody else is going to be half the be put out.
I'm going to be put out.
Bill's going to be a little put out.
Maggie's going to be put out because she asked to work late.
So there's three people that are willing and ready.
And there's one that probably could just dig a little bit deeper to see what the problem is
and come to find out.
She fixed it.
And Jill getting it done.
Yeah.
So is, you know, it's just, and she and I'm sure, and I haven't talked to her yet.
I haven't seen her since then, but I'm sure she thought about that.
And learned from it because she's listened to extreme ownership.
And she can't wait for the next book that caught me on the leadership.
But she's listened and read and she listens to your podcast.
And everybody in the factory listens to the podcast.
We've got Cindy up in shipping.
Who's like, she's got it on.
She's got it on.
She's like, what?
I'm listening to the track.
And I'm like, okay, you keep talking up there.
So I spoke by the river there.
And she's like, look at my setup.
She's got like four YouTube tabs open.
Dockle podcast.
She's not listening to four.
It wants, but she might start doing that.
She's got that.
She's very big down.
So in a lot of the staff listens to the podcast.
And I get a lot of questions from them about because leadership is a skill that is,
it's acquired through practice.
You know, people I used to believe, I don't know if I've chosen, I used to believe that you were born
leader.
You ever heard that?
I have, and I've discussed this before.
There is, you are born with some leadership qualities, some of them are good, some of them are
bad.
You can improve.
Oh, yeah.
And the more you pay attention to it, the more you will improve.
The only one person that can improve their leadership.
And that's the person who lacks humility.
Yeah.
If they lack humility, they're not going to get any better.
Because they're not doing anything wrong.
And they're mine.
They're not doing anything wrong.
You know what the hardest thing though is, at the factory, is we have a lot of different
life of folks from different walks of life.
But this is old New England.
It's not quite the New England we're talking about, but there's a lot of parallels because
of the recession and the lack of jobs and the lack of factories.
So for the folks who didn't go to college and I don't even think, I'm going to say right
out, like, I haven't said to my kids which college are you going to.
I've asked them many times what would you like to do.
But I'm not one of those parents who's like, which college you going to?
And I think that's okay too.
I'm not saying it's not, I've seen both ends of the spectrum from my own experience.
And I don't want to pressure them to go into the trades.
It's great money that you know, in all these different opportunities, especially with the
resurgence of manufacturing.
It's going to be so many opportunities.
But these people from the different walks of life, sometimes they are finding their
value in life by doing this work they're doing.
And what I found is something I didn't know existed and discovered is that they make the
product together as a community.
And that product goes to the consumer and in the past that ended.
Those two things there was one and there was the other.
Now the person who puts their hands on it on this end and the person who puts their hand on it on
the other end have a relationship because of new media, because of social media.
And so they don't just get fulfillment by making the product.
They also get fulfillment by seeing that product being used and being appreciated.
And with extreme ownership when this person here on this end, they're the worker, the worker.
They're finding that they find their being and they find so much value.
It's like it's a powerful thing.
I have to be very careful in my own leadership ways not to take that away from them.
And so that approach has got to be perfect person.
So I have to shift the way I talked to people.
I got to shift.
I can have like 25 conversations and I would have it 25 different ways depending on who the person is.
And you learned that by practice.
Yep.
So speaking of too much ownership and the dichotomy of extreme ownership because there is one.
You got, I got you one of the copies of the new book, dichotomy of leadership.
Where deck fall out in your brain?
Well I sat down.
I'm not a big reader.
I mean because it was an audio book, I got the paper copy.
So I sat down on a dock, on a little cabin on the lake.
And I sat down and everybody was around me and I was just in it.
And it sucked me in.
And I've never had a book sucked me in.
Dang.
Yeah.
So it's the first one I ever got sucked into and all of a sudden I looked up and the sun was going down behind the mountains.
And everybody was gone.
I was like, what happened?
And you know it's one, I'm going to tell you like extreme ownership.
Everybody needs to read or listen to.
dichotomy of leadership is actually going to correct your brain.
Like you think you know because you read that book.
Now it's time for us to tweak what you're thinking.
So it's powerful.
And I think for anybody like my little sister and my brother-in-law, their ed tax and their,
it's, they're in a whole different game.
You know they're working with children.
It's just so valuable.
It's life lessons.
You know something I realized so as Lafin, I've been talking about why we wrote the book, the dichotomy of leadership.
Why we picked that topic.
And what we've been saying is most of the questions that we would get asked would be about the dichotomy of leadership.
That's completely true.
But I'll tell you on top of that, more important.
Most of the answers that I give are that there's a dichotomy in leadership and you need to be balanced.
That is what you, even today I got asked at camp.
Hey, Jocco.
I'm a white belt, but I want to be default aggressive.
But I also hear you tell me to relax all the time.
Which one is it?
What do you want me to do?
Should I be default aggressive and get after it?
Yeah.
Or you, you tell me relax and I actually, you know, I say relax harger, right?
You try to relax harger.
Which one do you want me to do?
And I said, well, luckily in Lafin, they're two.
I'm like, left, luckily.
For this very reason, Lafin, I just wrote a book called The dichotomy of leadership.
And there's a dichotomy with aggression.
Even though I say default aggressive and I say,
that's got to be your mindset, that's got to be your default bonus.
You're going to be aggressive and you're going to go get after it.
And there's a chapter in the book that doesn't mean that you run to your death.
You have to balance that with caution, with energy conservation,
with not wasting movement on the mat, with not wasting capital in business,
without burning bridges, like all those things you have to be balanced.
And that's why I think like you, that's a great way of putting it.
It's going to, it's going to recalibrate and fix your brains.
Yes.
I've had a lot of these conversations with Be Little, you know?
Okay.
Because he's a different beast than I am.
I'm pretty passive.
Like, do your job, do it right.
Like, I'll help anywhere I can.
And that's just in general, right?
Like, I'm there.
I'm always on contact me any time a day.
And so Be Little's in a leadership position.
Sometimes like, jacos says, you ever get that?
Jacos says.
Oh, yeah.
So the jacos says thing in, you know, jacos says default aggressive.
Jacos says this.
And the idea isn't that in your brain, you're thinking,
jacos says.
The idea is that you, you, you rewire your brain so that
in neatly, you're saying something and not thinking about what
Jacos would say, you know, you want to make it your own.
And that's a real ownership when we're talking about a little bit of a real
ownership is that you're not just saying it, but you're understanding what you're
saying and why you're saying it.
And the words are coming not as a game, but as truth because that's what you
believe in.
And that I think takes a long time for people.
I thought where you're going with the jacos says is when, when the
subordinate uses your name to make something happen, right?
Exactly.
Hey, well, hey, Jacos, this is where we're going to do things.
And it's like, okay, well, that's not.
Why do you need to say that?
That's the same as saying I don't rank you.
That's the same as saying, look, exactly.
I don't rank you.
And just what we're going to do it.
Hey, Jacos said that's what he wants.
It doesn't make any sense.
Jacos said that's what he wants.
Like you can't do that.
You can't do that.
You can't use your boss's name as your authority.
If what your boss has told you to make happen doesn't make sense.
And you can't explain why it makes sense.
You need to go to back to your boss and say hey boss, I'm having some trouble here.
Can you explain to me why we're doing it this way?
So I can explain that down the chain of command to the troops and it's going on in the field.
And you know what else is real important?
And I believe that I think I took away this year is like the 70 30, the 80 20, the 90 10.
If if if there's a decision that needs to be made in and someone else is 70% there and you're the leader and in your mind you're 90% there.
What do you do?
Yep.
All day long.
Because 70% and that has been a hard lesson for me.
Yeah.
But I'm getting it.
Did I tell you about the fabric the other day?
No.
I went down Friday because I was like hey we got it got the factory.
We got you know 400 people coming to the factory from all over the world.
I want this place to look tight.
And I walked down the spiral staircase into the bunker and we have the the dumpster the daily dump right.
And in the dumpster is these fabric rolls.
And there's like you know 10 or 20 yards on each one.
And John was there.
He's he's overseeing and he was our first employee.
And he knows the process.
He knows the factory.
And he's overseeing everything.
And I told Ryan, make sure this the other day.
I put my hand on the fabric and I had this attachment to it.
It's like five was like padding it.
And I was like okay what am I doing?
What am I doing?
And I look up and I go John has it.
Why is this fabric in the dumpster?
It was the first fabric we made.
That's why I have an attachment to it.
He's like it had to go.
And I was like.
Yeah.
Why being the tear from my eye?
I'm like how do I handle this situation?
I'm thinking why didn't he cut off a yard or like a like why is it in the dumpster?
And I didn't want to pull it out of the dumpster because it didn't on an overall what he has decision he made.
He said Pete, you said.
You know how many times we've cut that by accident because it's a white.
And how much time we've wasted doing that and moving it around every time we need to get something.
I said yes.
And he's like I had so I threw it away and I go okay as I kind of like stroke my hand along the dumpster and kept walking even the factory.
It was a 50 50.
It wasn't a 70 30 20 is a 50 50.
I wanted to go back down that night and pull it all out of the dumpster before the truck came in the morning.
I didn't.
I just left it and you know what?
It felt great.
Why?
Because we don't need it.
Yeah.
We don't need it.
He's right.
We don't freaking need that fabric.
You know if I wanted to weave fabric like that we have the knowledge base.
We can weave fabric like that.
Doesn't matter.
Right.
What is it matter?
Because it's I have this emotional attachment to it because it was the first fabric we would.
What?
Whatever.
It's gone.
I'm good.
Move on.
I had to let him make the decision.
That's a rough one.
I've thought it was a rough board.
I've talked about this.
I've got a lot of t-shirts.
Yeah.
For what?
That's a rough one.
I've got a lot of t-shirts.
Yeah.
Because I have like from Gjitsu tournaments that I was in in 1996.
He's got to keep those.
I've got a lot of t-shirts.
And I've got a lot of t-shirts.
I've got one for you.
She wants to throw those right in the dumpster.
Yeah.
No.
They're in the drawer.
But just to everything else.
Before you send me this recommendation, because I know on social media a lot of people hit me up last time.
Saying, hey, you can get quilts made with your old t-shirts.
Yeah.
And if it comes down to it, we've got a factory full of work.
So it can make you quilts.
Oh.
They would love to.
Oh, they would all be like, we're making Jokka.
We're quail.
Yeah.
I'd actually shut down the factory for a day.
I literally would for an exercise, just like a group exercise.
Send them over, dude.
We'll make it happen.
I went in on that big time.
You took a couple of your t-shirts.
How many t-shirts do you have?
Planning.
Oh, planning.
Yeah.
I had a shirt.
I had a sweatshirt.
I wore it every day for 10 years.
Yeah.
It was yellow.
Oh, I know.
My wife called it Big Bird.
She threw out Big Bird.
Yeah.
I'm emotionally scarred from it.
I had a pair of shorts.
I had a pair of like crappy real thin cotton.
Cotton.
I don't think cotton.
Yeah.
Cotton.
They were the most comfortable shorts ever.
And I'd wear them around the house on like a Saturday.
You know, just cruising.
And maybe this was the end of my cruising curve.
My wife just threw them away.
Just threw them away.
No reason.
Just a ruthless woman.
They were stinging away.
So that actually explains a lot because we're so on the same page.
It's kind of scary when it comes to making durable goods and making all the new gear.
We're going to be launching next year.
Is that.
And no one somebody said to me recently is people are in life.
Their their attention is being pulled and it's everywhere.
Your mind is everywhere.
The last thing you want to do is be uncomfortable.
That's the last thing you want.
You can be uncomfortable in life with everything you're doing.
But when we're sitting here, I'm sitting here and some new grappling shorts.
Because they're I looked in my suitcase.
I dug through everything.
I was like, what am I going to be comfortable in?
Is this freaking grappling shorts and this teacher?
Mm-hmm.
I'm comfortable.
You know.
And I think that's valuable.
I think it's important.
Or else they wouldn't have been talking about it in the 1600s.
You don't have textiles or boots to make the apparel we need to be able to work.
Be comfortable and work.
Yeah.
Well, and then I actually call me an idiot.
But I was more interested in that piece just from the hardships.
And as I was reading, I was like, he's talking about.
About yards of cloth in the apparel.
I feel like a brilliant move for talking about that.
Yeah.
I'm a random.
Really?
That's pretty good.
Yeah.
Not bad.
You know, as we talk about leadership a lot, always.
And we talk, but what's interesting.
I always talk about leadership.
And people will sometimes ask the kind of typical question of what's different between leadership and management.
Or do you think leaders and managers are saying,
thing?
And I always say, hey, look, you lead people and you manage money and you manage timelines and you manage process.
You are actively involved on a daily basis in doing both and doing both in both leading people and managing the process.
So you're not just growth and leadership this year, but also in process and management.
Yeah.
And I'm not the best.
You know, I mean, we have a great team of people that help.
Like, I'm all over the place.
When it comes to that as far as I enjoy it.
But at the same time, I need to be kept in check.
Like, you can spend too much time in one area and not in the other area.
But as far as the process and the team, for me, they're one and the same.
If you build the team, then you'll get the process together.
Because you're all moving the same direction.
It's like draft.
It's like drafting.
You know, I scroll.
Yeah, you know, you're going to draft.
It's the same thing.
One person's out front and they're kind of doing this.
And you know what, we're not catching any wind behind them.
And we're just able to coast and move behind them and make our changes.
Those little micro changes we need to make as we flow.
And when you get a whole line of cars like that, you're all just flowing.
And that's what it's like in the factory.
So it's not me.
You know, I mean, I'm taking your leadership techniques and, you know,
these, this way of thinking is what it is.
It's a way of thinking.
And I'm just kind of filtering it down the chain.
And we've got good people.
And together we make it happen.
So I may have started it, but it's not me.
It's everyone.
So for a process, the process then is decentralized.
You've decentralized the way that you create the process.
Totally.
And you know, how exactly.
And it's jujitsu and it's extreme ownership.
And it's everything.
It's everything. It's a beautiful thing.
And you're able to scale at such a rate when you just take.
When you detach your emotion and you decentralized command.
And you really believe in it and understand winning it all costs.
That's the trifecta.
And that's what happened.
So we have this one employee Jen and she runs the pants line.
And she's been doing such a good job with the game.
The way that I said there had a conversation with her.
I'm going to take a listen.
I think you got this. She's like, what?
I said setting up the new lines.
You get the process.
You get.
You're going to develop the process because you understand what needs to take place.
Because you've got total buying.
You know, and she's not buying into.
She's buying into it as as I'm not a freaking explain it.
And it sounds kind of weird, but it's total belief.
No, that's not weird.
You know, it's belief in the end of end in it.
And when you really believe in it and you're not going home and saying,
Pete wants me to listen to Jocco podcast or Pete wants me to read this book or Pete asked me to do this.
When you're going home and you're saying to your significant other,
hey, you know what? I was asked to do this and I did it and it worked.
And it's changing my life, not just that work.
It's actually changing my life here.
And I want to do this better in life.
Yeah.
That's powerful.
I look at the difference between someone that says, oh, this is what I have to do at work.
And this is what I am doing at work.
Yeah.
Because when they say that, that's inherent in that statement is they own it.
And when you get people that own it, it's theirs.
Yeah.
And they're going to make it right exactly.
Exactly.
All right. So you've accomplished a lot with this.
We have.
Yeah.
Well, it started with you.
You have to be driven by you go just like all of us are, you know,
to have this vision and think and believe that you can take a 20 year old loop and get that thing up and run and make
close with it.
That's freaking crazy.
Yeah.
But you also do a great job of putting that ego in check.
And I'm wondering how.
How do you discriminate between what's positive ego and what's good and what's negative ego and what's bad and to give a little bit of context with a military with task in a bruiser, right?
I want everyone of those guys to believe that we are the best task unit in the history of the world.
That's who we are.
And at the same time, the dichotomy is I want them to think, oh, we need to do better.
We're not good enough.
We need to keep training.
We can't cut any corners.
And that's basically what you have to do.
I have to do as individuals.
I know I'm always trying to do that.
What do you see from your perspective?
How do you know when it's your positive ego?
That's going to help drive things in a positive way versus your negative ego.
That's going to negatively impact decisions that you're supposed to make.
Not based on what's the best for the company or best for the future or best for long term, but best thing for your real psycho ego that wants to just eat all these cupcakes.
You have full.
So I think I think the succeed in life you have to have a.
A confidence in ego a swagger.
And I like swagger.
But you also have to be a bit naive and ego makes you naive.
It's really what it is.
And I'll give you a good example.
I have this my buddy, Dustin Ireland.
And he's an eight-hand pilot and he's like the top eight-hand pilot in the world.
He taught it.
Red flag.
And he taught it to the start for the joint chiefs now and he's making his way up.
Who knows where to end up?
Where we're kids.
We used to do everything together, but we were so competitive.
And I had an ego, he had a little bit of an ego by 7th grade.
We were almost dunking basketballs.
By 8th grade we were both dunking basketballs.
I'm a 6th, 3, he's 5-9.
That's what happened.
Well, you got to believe you can.
And the way you believe you can is by having a mindset that you can't be stopped.
That's ego.
That's swagger.
That's confidence.
But it's different.
It's different believing it and.
Putting on blinders and getting into a state of mind.
Putting on blinders and getting into a fog.
Then looking side to side as you're moving forward.
And making sure there's not a fog in front of you and the fog is emotion.
And the fog is when that wells up inside you because you need to prove something that you're going to do this.
You're going to be this.
I think that.
It's relationship based too.
Where if someone's coming at you negatively and you're meeting that negativity with any emotional response, you got ego.
You got ego.
And at that point you got to self-check.
And I think the difference is those who are able to self-check know how to adjust there.
You go on the fly.
You've got to know how to self-check.
A lot of that comes through understanding that there's a lot of people chasing you that are born every day that are going to do great things that you're here for a moment in time.
And that you're not special.
But believe you're special because you are.
You know, and there's a dichotomy in that also.
So I think there's a lot to it and honestly.
I don't think I was a man until I was in my 30s.
And I still think I'm working towards manhood and I truly believe that. I truly believe like extreme ownership.
I believe I'm still working towards manhood.
And I have a long freaking way to go.
So I don't know how you teach that.
I think you can listen to the lessons of others.
You know, you listen to your podcast, which is very powerful for people to listen to.
And I think a lot of people here, that's the reason when you talk to them.
And you know, in these private conversations, they, they just seems like they all have the same type of mindset.
You know what I mean?
But yeah, I mean, you go.
You go as a strong and powerful tool if it's utilized right and you harness that ego.
You can do great things.
But if you hang on to it like it's your only tool, you're going to fail.
You've got to be careful with that one.
There's a difference to between.
ego and pride.
And they're very similar.
Maybe they're the same.
Maybe they're just close cousins.
Maybe they're brothers and sisters.
Maybe they're twins.
But.
But because, you know, pride is one of the seven deadly sins.
But at the same time, of course, you want people to be proud of what they do.
And, you know, I know, like again with a single platoon, you want those guys to get done with a block of training and have pride that they did it better.
They did it better than they were,
target that they got after it.
That's what you want.
But you just have to make sure that it doesn't influence and start to cause problems elsewhere.
Well, ego is like, if you want to, if you want to distill it, it's like, you know, there's no eye and team.
That's ego.
When it's individualized, it's ego.
When it's a team effort and everyone's on the same page and moving towards the same purpose.
It's confidence.
You know, and it can be defined by, is it about you or is it about this?
Is it about all of us?
Or is it just about me?
So that's a constant struggle.
I think for a lot of entrepreneurs.
I think for a lot of people in leadership is, it's not about you.
You know, it really isn't about you.
It's about what you're doing and how you're doing it.
And that you play a role in that, but you're not, you're not the lead role.
You know, you're, you're, it's not a one man movie.
You know, it's, it's, it takes a supporting cast and that supporting cast is everybody behind the curtains.
That no one sees.
And, yeah, how's it dealing with me?
Really, would use great.
You know what's funny is,
we both have a certain level of ego, but we both don't.
Because if you, if you check me, like, hey, and you can ask a simple question and flank me real quick.
And be like, I've got to, and let me shift my thinking real quick.
Give me a second or whatever.
We're having a conversation yesterday.
And I was like, well, think about this.
Well, what do you think about this?
And I'm not going to share what that was.
And, you know, you pause.
And you don't react to your respond.
I like that.
Because I know you're coming to me with a real answer that is you're emotionally detached from.
And you thought about before you responded.
And if it was an ego driven, you just wouldn't like do that.
Just provide you to this.
You know, what you stop, and you take about it.
And that's real good.
The other thing that's great about working with you is
that you're really good.
And you're, you're real unique, right?
Because you're this, you're this.
You have a lot of influence, first of all.
Over a lot of diverse, it's a diverse group of people.
I've seen, I mean, just at this camp, if you look at the people that you've touched that are here.
Men, women, younger, older, from all different,
let's say, backgrounds, racial backgrounds, cultural backgrounds.
Like there's tons of different types of people.
And that's a sampling.
That's just a sampling of the people you touch.
You know, and for me to check my ego and look at you and say, well, how can
Jocco touch these people the way he does?
Then I need to dig deeper and find out why.
You know, and it takes a human, someone who who understands
humility to do that.
Because your background is very unique.
There's not everyone.
That's a Navy seal.
There's not everyone's a Jiu-Sup Black Belt.
There's not everyone that runs a leadership company that's sought out by some of the big companies in the world.
So I check my ego to be like, man, he's maybe sound real cool.
I check my ego to be like, man, Jocco actually's going to help me.
So when I call you, I'm not like, I'm like, yeah, I'm just going to call Jocco and figure this out.
I'm like, okay, Jocco's on the west coast.
I check my ego.
I check everything he's okay.
Jocco's on the west coast.
I know he's probably traveling, you know, Monday and Wednesday.
He's going to be in the airport.
He's going to be getting hit up.
I'm going to reach out to him at this time and see if he's got five minutes for a phone call
because I know how much your time is worth.
So which is interesting because you know what I think about working with you, right?
Which is, which is awesome.
And I think the quickest way to explain it.
And I'm the only reason I'm talking about this is because I think there's lessons to be learned from it.
You and I make big decisions.
Big decisions.
Quickly.
With and the key factor in making big decisions quickly between you and me,
decisions that have a lot of money on blind decisions that have people's, you know, livelihoods on the lines.
We're making decisions like that.
And there's like no ego.
So in other words, I think you might hit me up.
Hey, I think we should do this.
And maybe I have a different idea.
And I just completely remove the fact that it's my idea or your idea.
It's like who, which one of these two ideas is better?
It's better.
I don't care who where it came from.
And and you and I, I know we got some similar parts of our personality.
Obviously, we got some pretty divergent parts too.
That's across the over and and so it's it's good to be able to just say,
Okay, I don't care whose idea this is, which one of these two divergent ideas is going to be the better one for what we're trying to do,
which one is going to deliver more satisfaction to the people we're trying to serve,
you know, which is what we're always thinking about.
How is this going to help the people that we're trying, the people that are trying that we're trying to serve?
How we can help with how can we help more?
And you know what's funny is when you know you, your ego is playing a role in your decision making is when you have to say something like this.
I'm emotionally detached.
Number one, if you have to say it, you are number two.
Number two, I'm completely detached right now.
Number two, you have to qualify your next statement by and I've done this a few times and I feel like such a douchebag.
You have to qualify your statement by this.
I've done this for 20 years.
I've expert in it.
Yeah.
He's expert expert marketer marketer.
So then then I get out phones like one, I do you should bad.
But you've got to understand that that when you have to say those things, we have to qualify those things.
It's like saying, Jocca says, you know, when you have to qualify your next statement, you've got to go and I do it, you know,
daily, even well, and in addition to not having an addition to it being your ego that's going up,
you also don't have a legitimate reason because if it was a legitimate reason, you could articulate it properly.
Right.
If I'm trying to say something to you and I say, look bro, these are this, I look, I have a good podcast.
A lot more people listen to my podcast, you know, podcast, you should listen to me.
That means I couldn't actually articulate what I was trying to say properly.
If I could articulate what I was trying to say, you'd go, oh, well, that makes sense.
Exactly.
If I can't, then I go, my podcast got more listeners.
You're so listening to me.
Yeah.
Like you said, that would be just men, level 12, douche.
But you know, and it's been the same thing.
Sometimes you've said to me, you said something that you would like to be like, I don't even know why I said that.
And it was just start laughing about it.
I'm like, whatever, do what we're doing.
I was going to say something to that point though, as far as the ego is concerned.
I think that if you don't have that sense, that feeling, like, it can be done.
You can do it.
You will do it.
But if you don't have that, I don't think you have the best tool you need.
I said something at one of the masters.
I said, and it's a dichotomy.
Believe won't get you anything, but without belief, you won't get anything.
Exactly.
So belief by itself, like, you know those people that are, they write a meme.
I just had to throw that neck of a voice.
I always thought that was meme-me.
I never knew it was meme-me.
Is it?
Well, is it?
Okay.
I was made really close right there.
The memes that say, you know, if you believe it, you can achieve it.
Yeah.
And that's not true.
Because just believing it does not make you achieve it.
If you say, I believe I'm going to be able to do 30 pull ups in two weeks.
And right now I can do seven.
Believe isn't going to get you there.
Exactly.
You have to make it happen.
That's what you're doing.
But if you truly don't believe that you can get there, you're not going to make the
effort to get it done.
Exactly.
Because guess what?
There's going to be times in any pursuit that you make.
There's going to be times where you're going to be put in check.
You're going to be tested.
You're going to be, you're going to be trials and tribulations.
And if you don't believe that you can get there, you're going to stop.
You're going to quit and you're not going to make it.
So, belief by itself won't get you anywhere.
But without belief, you're not going anywhere.
You know what I like to say is that you have this.
You, there's a dream.
And a dream is something in a state of sleep.
Then there's a belief.
And then there's the thing you're trying to achieve.
And then there's a void.
And in that void, you have to fill it with action.
You know, stepping forward.
So dreaming is one thing everybody has dreams.
Believing you take it a step further.
And then filling the void with action makes things happen.
So, um, we're on the same page.
I mean, a thousand percent.
Once again, once again.
Um, you know, that's, that's awesome.
I'm glad that, you know, it's awesome to be working.
And that, the things that we're doing.
People are digging.
So that's cool.
But I wanted to like actually talk a little bit.
This is what at GG2 camp right now.
Can I give them an example, though, of what?
I want to, I want to just give me an example of like,
when you, because we're, now because we're doing what we,
what we would do is like, we work so well together.
Right?
We're doing the same damn thing.
You know, like, we're, like, we work so well that we do work well together.
But let's give an example of how something could have gone wrong.
Or let's say we got off track for a minute and came back.
Right?
Here we go.
I designed this packaging.
And I was like, this is the best packaging.
This is the nicest packaging.
What was before?
It was for a new product.
We shall not talk about.
Okay.
Yeah.
And so it was, it was colorful.
It was, it's going to, you know, it's, it's, it's perfect.
It was great.
Yeah.
I think it was funny.
I did try to thank you.
And you tried to flank me.
I did.
I did try to thank you.
And so I showed it to be little and Megan.
And, you know, like, that's awesome.
I was like, yeah, I was like, I went a little over the top with it.
But it, like, this packaging would be the best.
Right?
That's what I told them.
I built myself up.
I built them up.
This packaging would be the best because of my expertise.
Right?
And, uh, and Brian's like, what's jacquo going to think about it?
And I was like, doesn't matter.
Doesn't matter.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Doesn't matter.
So here I have, did you say, did you say, like, you know what, we'll, we'll explain it to him.
We'll get him.
Yeah.
I said he's going to bring it down a level from what it is.
But hopefully we'll hit somewhere in between.
And so Brian, and then Brian's like, bro, if he doesn't, Mike,
that's just ridiculous.
And I'm like, no, I should do that.
I don't even worry about it.
I should, I don't even worry about it.
So I said it to you and it was like, no response.
And then you have like, you know, you iced me.
And in part of part of this, and when I'm talking about drafting, right?
Like, okay, my ego comes into play and then Jaco Zigo comes into play.
And then he says something, then I'd back off.
And then it comes back and his goes back.
And it back up.
So there's just constant, but that's not ego.
It's not ego.
It's coming to a decision that's best.
So like, after this call, it's called a rainbow, right?
Then all of a sudden you like make the rainbow black.
The whole rainbow.
Just make a black.
And that would be kind of cool.
So I go out to Brian now and I was like, yeah, Jaco doesn't like it.
And he like stands up and he's like, bro, he's like, if he doesn't like,
just like, I don't know, I know, he lives like a man or he can't.
He's not cool.
He's trying to be sensible.
Yeah, yeah, of course he is.
So like, I literally, and then I like, then, then I literally,
I was like, he's got on brand.
It's not right. And so I made a quick check, right?
And I was like, dude, I said, you know, I said, I think the packaging
were great, but you know what?
Let me go back to the drawing board because I haven't seen
what else it could look like.
How do you freaking know what else it could look like?
So then I went back to the drawing board and, you know,
when we pushed a further, we went on brand more with it.
And then you're like, yeah, not bad. Still not good, whatever.
You didn't really say this really like.
First four responses were you for too much.
Yeah, too much.
Too much.
Next one too much.
Yeah.
Exactly.
So you're like, okay, he just wants me to bring this back to the basics.
So you know what's funny?
You use the term on brand.
And that's one of those things I hear get thrown around like about
brands, right?
And I was at, I was getting interviewed the other day.
I was just not something to view.
And the guy said something about like, you know, it's
That's impressive how quickly you've built your brand.
Right.
And I looked at him and I said, I'm not a brand.
I'm a person.
What I'm doing is not what I'm doing so that I can leverage.
People.
What I do is just me and I'm just a person.
So if you asked me if I would wear a rainbow t-shirt, I wouldn't.
No, I've asked you to wear lots of stuff when you have it.
And if you asked me, but that's not because of I'm trying to be something.
It's because that's who I am.
Right. And I have been, I had one of my brothers who I hadn't seen in a while.
And he, we met at a little place we'd go to in San Diego.
And I hadn't seen him in a year and a half.
And he comes walking in and he sees me and I'm wearing the same thing that I always
wear.
Paragines, a victory black t-shirt.
And he walks in and he sees, and I was wintertime and I was wearing a flannel.
Like a whatever, like a wick and a new wringling flannel.
Like a new England, but like cheap whatever flannel with the quilt inside of it.
Yeah.
And he sees me and like when he sees me, and this is kind of, you know, after the books in the podcast,
and he's another seal. So he suspect.
And he sees me and I see his face and his face like gets happy when he sees me.
And he comes over and like does like a bro hug.
And he says, probably you're fucking exactly the same.
And I was like, yeah, man.
And he goes, I fucking knew it.
And like that to me was the best compliment I'll ever get.
Is like, okay, no matter what happens, I'm not a brand.
I'm not doing anything for, you know, any other reason other than it's just me.
And that's just just what I'm doing.
And if people are cool with it, man, that's awesome.
I'm stoked.
And that's what I love about you because you actually are checking your ego because this is who you are,
and you're not this person.
And that's what, that's why you work, you know, that's why it works.
No rainbows.
No rainbows, man.
No rainbow emojis coming from me.
I don't mind rainbows.
But echo said, oh, he texted my wife sometimes because they got to organize
and administrators of, he sent her a unicorn and a rainbow.
Yeah.
Should I be pissed at that?
Should another man send another, should send another placement?
Was it unicorn then rainbow or rainbow then unicorn?
I don't know what kind of secret messages are going on over there.
Was that even moon, bro?
It's just a soft, very common.
Would you send another man's wife, a rainbow and a unicorn in a tax, definitely not?
No, no, no, no, but yes, that's why.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
You asked a question wrong.
You, the question is, are there any possible circumstances,
where it's okay to send a rainbow and a unicorn?
Well, let me give you an example, echo.
If you're at, if you like a miscommunication,
if you're at the load in the air
and you get the prize, unicorn,
the fluffy one, do you turn it hand it to your wife
or do you turn it hand it to Chocco's wife?
But.
Okay, so get it.
I just gave you a little bucket of juice.
You're my phone.
On my hand, I'm supposed to go into my dinner.
Otherwise, any other girls that are
going to let unicorns all around.
All around the channel.
I go hasn't changed.
And that guy has a train for it,
but he's coming after my negative.
I'm back in the front of my girlfriend.
I'm gripping it, ready to be.
Yeah, no.
I was just kidding.
No, I think it's absolutely okay.
Because we don't have ego.
I'm just making sure.
So we know we're dropping ego.
Hey, with your own friends.
Yeah, no, that's cool.
I guess.
I don't send his wife unicorns and rain.
Right.
But if you did, that's cool.
In fact, it's a name.
That's kind of nice.
Talk to.
Yeah.
You know what?
You want to know what?
You want to know the only reason why I think it's acceptable.
That this guy echoed Charles Sands, my wife.
Unicorns and rainbows.
Because you love him like a brother.
No, because he sends me unicorns and rainbows too.
There you go.
He keeps running all around.
Yeah, he keeps.
He actually sends me.
I think actually sending me my wife unicorns and rainbows.
He probably does.
You know what?
He has the best flanking technique.
What is that?
What do you do?
He makes sure the wives are happy.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, man.
Yeah, yeah.
He has your wife and woman like, I go so nice.
Oh, yeah.
Absolutely.
That's like three unicorns and rainbows.
All of a sudden he's nice.
Well, that's why I send him because it's nice.
So boom, there you go.
Where is the win win win?
Yeah, oh, man.
So I didn't want to before you brought it back to you.
It's just cool man.
That's good points, man.
I mean, I think you, you and I are both like regardless of anything else.
We're both established human beings, man with families and businesses.
So there's definitely going to be, I mean, I remember when I met you, I was like, you
know, this may not work out.
This may not work out.
And I was like, you know, this guy, he's done a lot.
And his ego might be a little bit.
There might not be enough room for someone else in this picture.
What I realized is it what it wasn't ego you know what it was.
It was what I talked about it.
It was pride.
You were proud of what you and your team had done.
Proud of that rightfully so.
I'd say pride and protection.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, for sure.
For sure.
Like, life's work.
You know, we just did the kippling poem.
If everything you put your whole life into, that's what that's what this is.
And you're like, look at me like a hey man.
All of a sudden, I can't just let's do a little security check.
Exactly.
But you know, I just realized how proud you were of that.
And that your ego, your ego was, hey, I don't care about that.
What I care about is making sure that this goes in the right direction.
There's like, like, what's kind of like what I just said about what is me?
Well, this is you, right?
This is like what you built and you want to make sure that it's reflected well.
Yeah, that's all the time.
That's it.
And there's not nothing wrong with that.
If you didn't have that, you wouldn't be here.
You wouldn't have made it this far.
No chance.
True.
You've given up after the freaking first tangled bunch of, right?
It's getting out of the world.
Yeah.
All right.
DJ, too.
Yeah, man.
I want to talk because it's a pretty, do you just can't be awesome?
Clearly.
Do you do immersion kippling?
If you don't want to talk about it's, was it seven days total?
Yeah, Sunday to Sunday. Sunday to seven Sunday up in Maine and the week before Labor Day.
We before Labor Day, DJ, too.
DJ, too.
And DJ, too.
Three times a day.
We have sessions.
People are training outside of sessions.
But you've been running it for seven years.
Beautiful camp here.
Camp Laurel.
Yeah.
And what's the town?
It's where actually in Mount Vernon, Maine, Mount Vernon, Maine, on echo.
Echo Lake.
Echo Charles.
Echo Charles Lake.
Layers.
Did you jump in this week?
Thank you.
I have found the time and brought you candy and a roll.
You can't throw it into your outer door.
That's right.
Really?
I'm not feeling real.
But you saw the night tea and I knew.
I know when you look up that direction.
You go to the creative party or brain instead of the analytical.
You see that he's like, can't find this time.
No matter how good it going with the better words of time.
It's like on my way, like when I think about it, I'm like doing something and then, you know,
wanting you're, I'm done doing it.
I just, you know, it's not in my mind for yet.
I have not, I have not, I have not probably worked on jumping in the lake.
Yeah, yeah.
I've tried this.
It was so hot when we got here.
It was actually, I was working out in the morning in the gym and it was, I was sweating.
So, because I sweat a lot.
Yeah.
And I mean, clearly, if you go on my social media, I take some pictures of my sweat sometimes.
But I was sweating so much.
It was freaking gross because it was 95 degrees in humid.
And so there's just Lake Jocco in the gym.
I get to relax everywhere. I think people were, people were like, oh, fired up.
Jocco's here. Oh, that's kind of gross.
No, yeah.
For a second.
But then you jump from the lake and then a bunch of people showed up and you were walking down the
dock and everyone is like, oh, shit.
Like, king Arthur walking into this house.
You were just like, you were just like walking.
And I was like, and I was, I was standing up on my dock when I can't have it.
And everyone's just like, oh, I'm so shocked.
Yeah, I remember, remember, remember,
I remember, remember, Daisy at the factory when when there was the bottle of out there.
And she came over to me and she said, hey, can I have some bottle of out and you were right next door and she had met you yet.
She was like, 19 years old.
And she listens to the podcast.
And I was like, yeah, you got to ask Jocco wherever she's like, oh, I just want that.
And I was like, yeah, he's right there and she looks behind her and she looks up and she's like,
Oh, we're Jocco.
I was like, what?
So funny. Anyways, we had like 200 people doing that. So you were just like, and then you got a bomb bar.
It was awesome.
Well, I have been hitting the lake after I get out of Lake Jocco in the gym.
Yeah.
Then I moved down to Lake Echo and go for a swim.
And it is awesome. It's been warm too.
Yeah.
It's been warm.
People weren't prepped for the shift.
Oh, no.
I warned them. I know.
I actually posted like videos in my car of the temperature.
Okay. Here's the temperature. It's 55 degrees. Look, see here.
It's going to get colder and the daytime's going to be 80 or 90.
Prepaire for that.
How people are getting so soon.
So we're here for Jocco. Not just for swimming and working out, even though that is part of it.
I was wondering about so it's good to when you do something. You've done this once every year.
You do it done it for seven years.
When you have a frame like that, it's like a snapshot in time.
I wanted to kind of ask you about what you've seen.
First of all, Jiu Jitsu in terms of the people that are coming to camp.
Who are they? What's been different?
I mean, obviously there's a big change this year because we had a lot of people that listen to this podcast.
Yeah.
That have come up.
Probably a couple hundred of them over the two days.
I would say.
Yeah. Absolutely.
And you know what the crazy thing is?
I actually put my cell phone number and then the public.
Did I have to try that?
No.
Oh yeah. I'm like, hey, you're coming to camp.
You want to come to camp?
Got a question. Here's my cell phone.
So I usually preface it with like don't text me crazy shit.
Don't ask me random questions.
But I can answer questions about camp because I want to give.
I want to give people zero excuses.
Yeah.
I didn't know what to expect.
I didn't know who's going to be coming.
So the messages I got were like,
Hey, I listen to Jocco podcast.
I've never trained you, Jitsu.
Is this a good time to start?
Hey, I'm 50 years old.
I've never trained you, Jitsu.
Would it be good to come to camp or not?
You know, a lot of questions like that.
And every single one I said, I've got a bunch of people.
Ask them the same question.
We'd love to have you.
And it will be the greatest singular experience you will ever have in Jitsu.
Because you're going to be starting not just an amazing place.
But with amazing instructors.
And when I asked the first day,
everybody raised their hand who hasn't trained you Jitsu before.
Were you here at that first time?
We were a couple hours behind 50 people like hand up.
I was like, I looked at the other instructor like,
Holy crap.
If you're listening and you want to train Jitsu,
I do recommend that you do it.
There we go.
I do recommend it's really good for you.
It really is good for you in so many different ways.
And to see the people here that have never trained Jitsu.
You've got to have never trained Jitsu before.
And see that it's, I don't think any of us, none of us.
You don't ever get to see 50 people that have never trained Jitsu before.
Or 75 people that have never trained Jitsu before.
And you get to teach them all at once.
At least I've never done that before.
No, and I mean, you definitely don't get 58 year old,
7th and judo black belt who have never put on a Jitsu gear before.
You know, looking for a white belt.
Yeah.
And we've got one of them too.
No, it's, but my point in seeing all the people at one time.
You know, when you occasionally get a white belt or someone that's never trained before,
you teach them a couple of moves.
And you get to see a one spark and someone's brain.
Go, they start to get it.
But to see 50 people go,
it's not the eyes open up.
And it usually doesn't happen all at once,
because some people will get it when you get,
you know, some people make the connection here.
Some people make the connection over here.
Some people make the connection over there.
And it's,
but in a, in a period of an hour and a half training session,
you can definitely see people.
You'll see 25% of the people make a real connection.
And the connection is between knowing and not knowing.
Between between not knowing what this thing is
and how expansive it is and knowing what this thing is and how expansive it is.
And how it is so powerful.
I think that's the difference.
When somebody goes, oh, like I did it yesterday,
I was teaching just the mownesscape and I was teaching the mownesscape
with firstly, oompa, right?
And then going to elbow escape.
And as I explained, I was looking at this one girl and as I explained,
that as I tried to oompa them over and the person moves at the moment,
and the person moves out their leg to stop from being flipped over.
And I said, freeze.
And it's now look at his leg.
And I said, that's what I wanted and I slipped my leg out and put him in half card.
And I looked at her eyes and it was like, oh, yeah.
And her eyes got big.
And I was like, I looked at you and everyone's looking at you.
Look at her.
Yeah.
She gets it.
Because that's when you realize it.
And then you realize that all this stuff,
every move that you've seen over three days,
it's all connected.
It all makes sense.
And it's all, it's all into woven with each other
into this fabric that creates this thing.
You looked at me yesterday and you're like, hey, get me in
a quarter guard and I'm like, what's quarter guard?
Oh, you actually like, if you put a foot in whatever.
I didn't know, I didn't actually know it was a,
I just thought was like, I was the stop was that was me trying to mount you
or pass the guard.
But you showed the one, you're like, I go to D-Path.
And I was like, I go to D-Path from here.
That's what I like to do.
And you're like, well, let me show the move because you're moved to
complex.
I was like, yeah, they're failing at it right now.
And so you kind of took the control of that session.
And you did this move where how you got to D-Path.
And I was like, thinking to myself, I like that.
And I had one of those.
No.
And I was like, oh, stop.
Because you use the same clamp hip rotation.
I used for like one of my special sweeps.
And I, and I didn't, and never registered.
And I was like, that first thing I'm teaching like a pack
is that right there.
That's Jeff Glover.
That's off Jeff Glover was the head,
G-Jitsu instructor with Dean at my gym for four years.
So we do a lot of deep half guard.
Not enough.
I need more.
But he had some great setups there.
You know, and what do you seen right now moves?
Well, at camp one, what did everyone want to learn?
Well, first of all, camp one was a bloodbath.
Not really a bloodbath that was just came up here to beat each other.
Yeah, we, over camp one was, first of all, I had what belt were you in?
Camp one.
I think I was a fresh black belt.
I think I had, I think I just got it.
Yeah.
Because it was 2012.
I had just gotten back from Abu Dhabi.
And I was on top of my game.
And we had like a tanky, you know, you know,
Augustine, that was up here.
Or I fell from Eagle Barboa, so then the main crew to deck one and
Mackenzie Derners up here.
And so that that first a year.
We were just being up on each other.
This came up here to basically trade everyone's competing and whatnot.
Yeah.
And what had happened is is we had launched like,
K, we're bringing these experts.
But we had launched that after we had, you know, started to have the
registration right in for a while.
And what we saw that first year was we didn't pick up a lot of
extra people by having the experts.
Right.
And so people came and then we did the second year as a lot like the first
year, except there was more people.
And what we came to find out is that people were looking for
an experience, right?
Everyone's looking for something.
And the way that we loved you, Jitsu and how it's affected our lives.
It's almost like if you inject that with something extra.
That's what campus.
So Dean pointed this out to me.
He's up here right now.
Dean Lister.
Dean pointed out to me that in Europe, he says adults do camps.
Big they go to camp in America.
Kids go to camp.
And that makes sense, right?
I said, I'm never even dreamt of going into a camp.
A camp.
And every even dream as an adult, are you kidding me?
I never thought about that.
But in Europe, apparently, hey, it's totally normal to say, hey, you're going to go to this
rock climbing camp or you're an adult.
You're a grown person.
You're going to go to a gymnastics or a yoga camp or something like that.
Or you're going to go to a tennis camp as an adult.
In America, we don't do that.
No, we do now.
Yeah, we do.
You just do camp.
I'm going to get something.
And you know, echo when I were talking the other day.
And I think this is a great premise.
And I don't want this to sound crazy, right?
But imagine if the goal of the camp is to increase your skill level one belt.
That's actually a very good reality.
So it's not, it might not be realistic, right?
You're not going to go.
You're not going to gain that much skill.
But let me break it down.
Okay, your initial thought is like, no way could that happen, right?
You can't get that much better.
I sure pretty good.
But now I want you to think about something.
You train, if you come here and you train for six hours a day for seven days.
What do you got 42 hours?
You take that.
That's two or three months worth of training.
But think about this.
How often when you go to training?
Are you learning a move that you already knew?
Often. How often you're going to training? You're learning to move that really doesn't fit your style.
Often.
What if you came to a place where you were just going to learn the moves that you needed to improve your skill level that much?
Now, I think we're close. I mean, that you're going to walk out of this camp as is right now.
Just way better, way better.
I was thinking about a one time I taught a group of seals five straight days, eight hours a day.
For for Getsu.
I called it. I named it.
I named the course.
What? It was called Jaco.
J. A. Period O. Period C. Period K. Period O.
And it was it stood for.
Do you get to offense for combat killing operations?
Can't take for Getsu.
I was like, I don't know.
I was young.
I was 25.
But anyways, so what I noticed is that when I was teaching Jaco offense for combat killing operations,
when I was teaching that course of instruction, even though I was training guys that had never trained,
and I was a blue belt at the time.
But even though I was training guys that had never trained before,
I was still going to Fabio's my teacher at night.
And every day I got like better every day I got better.
And I thought to myself, oh wow, there's something to this.
And that's why when I would do deployments with no guys to train with,
I would just have my guys come in train with me.
You know, like, hey, you come from 12 to 12, 15, and you come from 12 to 12,
for change to 12, 30, and I just roll with every guy in the cartoon,
and just to get the mat time.
Because that mat time is going to help you.
But then if you imagine this, you take what we're doing here.
You have specific instruction instructors that are good at different little parts of the game.
And you go, oh, Alexa, can you help me with my daily life?
I'm going to spend the next four hours getting not a private, but a private basically.
Basically, from Alexa, oh, Dean Lister's here,
A Dean, can you show me how to finish this key look in these different positions?
You know what I mean?
Like, you could go, uh, the deco, can you look?
I want to, I want to sweep from butterfly guard.
Can you, your master at this?
Can you, perfect my game in that area?
And I think if you carved it up right,
you could look, are you going to get a new belt level?
No, but if you make that your goal to get in here and fill holes,
you're going to walk out of here with massive amounts of improvement.
You know what's incredible?
And that's the immersion part of it?
Like, it's immersion.
You know, people are very nervous about not so much anymore,
but I still get a lot of emails like, is it right for me?
And it's, well, we're all adults first of all.
So it's, there's sessions and there's opportunity outside those sessions,
but everyone's here for the same purpose.
And like I said, hey, no one's going to win a camp trophy, right?
It's not what's all about it is full on immersion of Jiu-Jitsu,
from some of the world's best.
But we've had people come to camp as a new blue belt.
They're now black belts. They still come to camp.
Yeah. Usually when you hit purple belt,
you get a bit of ego.
When you hit brown belt, you're basically a black belt.
And when you hit black belt, you think you should be sponsored.
That's how it goes in Jiu-Jitsu.
That's probably out here on the West Coast and San Diego.
Yeah. Like, yeah, you're not thinking that.
Okay.
You're kidding.
Those two are black belts.
Did you see all the black belts and brown belts out there?
That register for camp?
Oh yeah. Yeah. It's crazy.
It's crazy.
So it is, it's like a full immersion for all levels,
which it's incredible to be able to bring all the levels to camp.
Okay. Now this needs to be said.
It's also in what we would call in the military, a gentleman's course.
Yes.
Did you do the civilians know what that means?
Uh-huh.
The difference. Okay. In the military, a normal course of instruction means you're going to go and you're going to be basically treated like crap.
And you're going to do crappy things.
And it's like, hey, we're going to make you understand this.
A gentleman's course, like, okay, look, we're going to get the material covered.
You're going to get treated like the grown man.
Or in this case, growing woman.
You're not going to be treated like a child.
So that, so this place is a gentleman's course.
It's not like, hey, you will be, if you want to skip a session here,
skip a session.
You don't want to do take down.
Oh, don't do take down.
You don't, you want to relax in the morning and don't want to do the morning session.
Or you want to stay up on the mat all night and get on vampire hours.
Get something.
I got on vampire hours.
That's, yeah, I know two way.
Yeah, every morning.
So, so it's a gentleman's course.
And, and you can come here and you can pick and choose what you want to do.
If you, there's people here that I thought this was cool.
People here that are injured that cannot roll, but they're here.
And they're learning moves and they're drilling as much as they can.
And then cool, they're going to go home and use them live when they can use them live.
So that parts, that parts pretty cool.
Uh, one, I want to go, I hate to drag you back this, but move.
Do you remember moves like from seven years ago that people were looking at.
Compared to now.
Any, anything, does anything jump out of you or am I just talking up on their own trick?
No, totally.
Totally. I mean, I remember standing there.
I remember sitting in the stands watching,
Hodger Gracie choke everybody out from Mount.
Every single person in the pyramid at the World Championships.
And thinking that's, and I was young, young, you know,
belt and I'm thinking like, all that's real, Gigiitsu.
Then I remember the men, des brothers, barren, bow-loing, everybody.
And then thinking like, well, maybe that's Gigiitsu.
You know, but as you progress, you come to find out it's all Gigiitsu and it's all cyclical.
And that's the bottom line.
There's a cycle of Gigiitsu and things, you know, your body can only do certain things.
Right? You can only, you can't bend your elbow backwards.
You know, there's, you have some resilience.
You build up some resilience to different things, but it's a, it's the cyclical thing.
And I've seen things that came and then were defended and then changed.
Like the daily he would guard.
I love the daily he would guard.
And it's coming back, you know.
And, and, and it's the first time the first time I've seen it come back is when that,
that new kid swept Bouchesha with a straight up daily he was sweet.
Who's that kid that's coming on the scene hardcore now?
Oh, right.
Um, man, grab Marigali, Marigali.
Yeah. But as far as moves for me, I always stick to the basics like, you know,
make them skate on ice when you're on bottom and put them under the ice when you're on top.
And I just try to stick to those two things and, you know,
moves come or go, but, you know, the concepts stay the same.
They don't ever change concepts and just do conceptually nothing ever changes.
You're trying to do something.
Yeah.
It's like the laws of combat.
Okay.
The concepts don't change. Covered moves cover and move.
Big and it's off balancing someone.
Yeah.
Putting them off balance.
Right.
What when you see different people teach what type of instruction do you think works best for you personally,
Pete Roberts?
For me, I want clear concise.
Uh, just straightforward show me once.
Do you like to see the move?
Like like individual moves or do you like to understand the broader concept?
I'm a concept guy.
I'm serious.
Because my artsy artsy, very mind.
But I like the concepts of it.
Yeah.
And it's weird.
And that's one thing that's good about this is you have some of the instructors teach.
Here's the, here's move one, two, three, four, five, six, seven.
That's the move.
You do these seven things.
Other teachers here are like, here's what you're trying to do first.
There's what you're trying to do second.
Here's what you're trying to do third.
It's probably going to cause this to happen.
And when that happens, here's what you're going to do with it.
It's a linear system.
And I look at the jutsu non-linear.
Yeah.
But it's okay to look at linear two because some people that's their learning skills,
I'm saying that.
That's why I'm saying this is some people.
I give them the concept and then they say, because I'm a,
I'm a conceptual teacher.
Yeah.
I give them the concept and they say, okay, where do I grab?
Exactly.
And as soon as they asked me that, I realized, I say, okay, grab here.
Mm-hmm.
Other hand here, foot here.
Push, pull, lean.
There it is.
That's why I'm a shitty teacher.
Mm-hmm.
Well, you're only a shitty teacher to people that aren't that don't learn the way you do.
Exactly.
So, like that, I think that's good to have people.
I mean, how long you've been training for?
Uh, 2006.
I started.
So, 12, 12 years.
12 years.
You've been training 12 years and I showed a move that you were a black belt when I was, you know,
in diapers and jiu-jitsu.
So, I showed a move that you didn't see in 12 years, right?
You showed a move.
I've been training for a long, longer, 20, something years.
And you showed move.
I didn't.
Never seen before.
Is that mean I need to expose myself to more?
Yes.
But it also means, guess what?
There's only so much knowledge.
And what's cool about this is the moves get filtered by human beings, right?
You're not out there teaching a move that you haven't used and don't feel good about.
Whereas, there could be moves that you can learn like all that person's never actually used that move before.
Mm-hmm.
So, things to be interested.
You know, you talked about immersion and an explain this to everyone.
I don't know if I've ever heard.
Have I ever done a language-comparative language to on this podcast?
Oh, on this podcast, I don't know.
Okay.
I don't know either.
For people that want to learn jiu-jitsu, this is an immersion camp, but no matter where you're learning it.
This is great.
I know what you're going to say.
That's the language thing.
I really got me when you said this.
Okay.
So, here's what it is to learn jiu-jitsu.
You know, I compares to learning a language.
I was an English major.
So, and I studied linguistics inside of studying English.
Learning a language and learning jiu-jitsu are very similar.
When you, so when echo, who echo gives a great introductory course to jiu-jitsu, it's like what you teach?
Mount, you teach all the positions.
Mount, back, half-guard, guard, sign-mo.
Side control.
And you teach a little bit of action from each one.
Maybe one or two submissions from one or two.
One or two escapes from one or two.
So, it's a total of five positions and seven moves.
Let's say something like that.
When he gets done teaching that introduction, and it's actually the same introduction that I basically teach.
And when I've taught it, the master of the zoo, when I first said this, so at the master, I said,
when we got done with this hour and a half, and they're all these people are all fired up,
because they know how to do the Americana.
They know how to do the re-arrunaked choke.
And they're basically in their minds trained killers.
I guess probably, you know, absolutely.
And when we get done with that, I say, okay, you have just learned the one line that forms the small letter A that goes down the side.
You only learn that.
You haven't even actually learned the letter A yet.
Exactly.
In terms of looking at his language, you train for another few hours.
You might have an A, right?
And then you, then, okay, now, but can you speak a sentence?
Nope.
You can't even form a word yet.
There's one word you can form.
It's A.
You got one word.
That's basically where you're at.
So what you need to do is you need to learn more moves.
But once you learn different, you couldn't just learn letters, you need to learn how to spell.
That's how you put the move moves together.
And then you got to learn how to fit those moves together in, against and alongside other moves.
That's a sentence.
And then you got to figure out how you're going to roll through a paragraph.
And then you put in these moves together.
Then you realize that it's also like language.
It's like the bait.
You're actually somebody's throwing other words that you and you need to learn how to respond to.
And once you learn all those words and you learn how to put them in a paragraph.
And you get to end of that.
And you think you've mastered the language.
Then someone says, hey, guess what?
You've got to learn German.
Yeah.
Which is, you know, judo.
And then you got to learn sombo, which is Russian.
And you got to learn all these different languages.
You got to learn all these different languages in order to really truly understand.
And I feel like I feel like black belt for me.
Like getting to black belt was the start of that was like okay, the English language.
But I felt my grammar still sucks.
Yeah, I feel like we're going to get to those other languages yet.
I feel like from the language perspective, when you get your black belt, you have the language capability of like a ten.
You're not going to be able to just pick up a book and start reading it.
You're not going to be able to do that.
You have to be, you know, one of these guys that has been training and teaching for a really long time and competing is.
And though, and really have like a broad mind.
And you know what's crazy is I, you know what, we got the plastic forks in the comments.
Someone has asked me what the stripes mean.
And so I took out the plastic forks and I had lined them up.
And I was like, what do you think?
I'm going to be able to do that.
And I'm going to be able to do that.
And I just drive's mean. And so I took out the plastic forks and I lined them up.
I said that's three years of black belt.
That's three years of black belt first too.
The next one, that's five years, that's five years.
That's seven years and that's seven.
I said, so when you look at someone,
you can see how long they've been a black belt.
Because their question was, are there differences in black belts?
Absolutely, there's differences.
Most of these guys have been black belts in World Champion.
champion and have a hundred black belts when I just started training GJ2. So go to them.
They've got the knowledge. I'm still trying to learn that. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. And there are,
I mean, there's as much disparity in black belts as there are from white to brown belt. Yeah.
There's, there's that much difference. Absolutely. All right. Cool. I think I think that's a good place
to wrap it. Wrap it. Um, speaking of wrapping up. Echo Charles. Yes. You didn't even jump into that.
You did through conversation very much. You guys are nailing it on the head every single time. No,
like, I mean, I had every single time. And it's like not every single time. I would just say every time.
I got it, you know, in the spirit of how much to work. How much torture. So for those of you
don't know, Echo Charles has a, a, a, a call to broken wing. You would have a broken wing. We got that by
covering injury recovering. How much torture was it to be here without rolling? It was like, um,
like a broke. You know, when you torture someone, then they break. Oh, I broke. Yeah. The other day.
So actually rolled two rounds. I didn't re-injure it or nothing like this, but
you definitely felt it. I heard it just from all the twisting activity. So it's like,
but I feel it is just one of those hurt things. It'll be fine. Absolutely fine. But yeah,
tortures too. Or as far as the degree, whatever degree it takes to break. That's me.
Let's definitely different. Different people. Yes, it is. So, uh, well,
maybe we're not going to torture anyone, but if we want to help them instead of torture,
yeah, maybe you could, you know, close and then how to do that. Demonstrable actually, what, illustrate. No,
illustrate. No, illustrate is also explained. Yeah, like, you could paint a picture if you will. You
can metaphor. All right. Let's do it. Okay. Let's talk about origin first. Like we always do that.
By the way, it's awesome. Pete, since you're here, what do you think? What do I think? What do you think about
origin? It is like, you know, you know anything about this or what? I know a little bit about it.
Yeah. I've been involved for a little while. What do you want to talk about with origin? Okay.
And the whole podcast is kind of like a stressful. Yeah. What we haven't done this before. Okay.
New person hasn't trained your juts before. Need a key. What do you want you to get? Well,
there's only one. To get one. What specific? That is, uh, never trained your juts to come.
I'll get a, get a, uh, compethletic key. Okay. So, so there's levels of keys. We make a key here in the United
States from American Girl and Cotton and you've heard echo said before. A key is a tool you need to
start your journey. Most schools are going to require you to have one. Normally, if you start an
MMA school, you're going to start with a rash guard and some shorts. But if you're going to go
try jutsu and I would recommend, you know, trying it in the key first, you're going to need a key.
And that right there is, is a tool you're going to use in your journey. It's not just something
you wear and it's actually a tool. It's actually something you're going to grip and hold and turn
and twist. And when you're doing that or when someone's doing that to you, you need the best tool.
And that's what we make up here in Maine are the best tools for training. And the form of it just
happens to be a key. So, someone's never trained before. Compa athletic, calm, athletic, calm, athletic.
Calm, athletic. So, I did it in like portrait. I made it. The portrait is ATLAT. So, it's athletic.
Right. You just said, I thought you said that. I say athletic. Okay. Because it means athlete. So,
calm, athlete, calm, athletic. Yeah, that's that. Ortee. Yeah, it's a little little bit of top.
Hey, but that's not like a hard and fast. Like, hey, if you're just beginning, you should get this.
It's kind of, that's kind of like you're just recommendation. Right. Because I use it too.
I use the athletic. I'm going to have an axiom too. I mean, the axiom is like next level.
Like if you're serious about training, like you're going to commit to it, like you're really going to commit to it.
You need to get an axiom. So, if you're compared to like a surfboard, right? I mean,
I'm assuming you start surfing and you get the, you know, like you're watching or short. Remember that?
This is a surfboard. You have watching or short?
Yeah, okay. I have, but I haven't seen the long time. Okay. So, he wanted to ride.
What's the board? He, I forget. You ever watched North Shore? No. Oh, dang too bad.
Yeah. That's, that's cool. Anyway, so this kid, Rick Kane, for a, if they, if surfers,
well, if any surfers listening, we'll be like, yeah, North Shore is cheesy. I get it. I know man.
But you can't, the point. The point. The point. I'm not in the loop. It's okay. Welcome to Echo's podcast.
You're not in the loop. Rick Kane wins a surfing competition in Arizona in the tank.
Yeah. Go so wide because you're going to surf the big ways. You get this trainer old school,
soul surfer type guy. Who plays that? Jerry Lopez. No, no. Jerry Lopez is Vince on the kind of
the rival of the local. Anyway, that's a different point. So, he kind of at one point, this is
a small kind of small part of the movie, but he wants to use this like special board that his trainer
kind of shapes or or had or whatever. And he's like, right, you know, ready for that. Yeah. It's not like that,
right? You seem to know. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
like that. Because you could get an axiom day one. Yeah. We have people that do. Yeah. They'll listen to your podcast.
No, but like I got started to do any the best. What? Yeah. Cool. That is the, the axioms
comfortable as can be. But we read, we're reinventing the key again for next year. Yeah. Yeah. We
are doing that well. No, I know we mentioned it. Yeah. But you do really good things like, um, like the
pants, for example. Yeah. Like, you know a regular, I don't know regular, whatever. The different kind
of key trash bags style pants versus you know mapping body mapping pants. Yeah. That's a big deal.
Yes. That's really what set us apart initially. Yeah. I could see why it's really why we
one of the reasons we decided to bring manufacturing back is because when every time we come
up with something to get ripped off, our manufacturers send it over overseas and have to give it
somebody else in the pants is a huge, huge thing for better training. Yeah. Holy. Also speaking
of pants joggers. Okay. I don't know if I said this before. I told some guys earlier today or yes,
you know joggers. I don't know if you remember this last year. You were like, oh yeah. And
I hear some here's some joggers or whatever. I'll say you know, it's like joggers. You know,
isn't that the slim fit? You know, and you're like, yeah, I saw like whatever, you know,
origin, I'm going to represent it put them on. Then what pizza did I didn't tell you this talk?
He goes, he goes, yeah, you know, it is more of a stylish thing. He's like, you can pull it off.
I was like, ooh, thanks, bro. You can. And truly, truly, 100% true. Now, I like I have joggers. I'm kind
of into joggers. No, I even bought pants that weren't sweat pants that were that jogger style.
And I'm not joking. Yeah. I came to me on the mat. He's like, hey, man, I was hoping you'd signed
this book for me. But I got to tell you, I bought joggers yesterday. I was like, I can't do it.
Well, it's not signing. You can't say that after I signed it, but it's not. But the thing is,
they're not only, okay, so you have joggers, which I did, because if you do really jog in them,
like they are, it's like they're ergonomically kind of made for actual jogging, because they don't
flap on the bottom or whatever, and they give you room in the depth of difference between joggers and
the sweats or something. Yeah, what if I'm not mat, just the shape. So, and this, I'm just assuming
that's not what the shape is different. But what is the difference? They're more on the thing. Yeah,
they're slimmer on the legs, and then usually they're a little bit more roomy in the hips, right?
Like in the, are the knees roomy at all? Mm.
That's good. That's good. That's good. Any more roomy for me? I get it. Yeah. Anyway,
they're functionally sound is what I'm saying. Yeah. But you add that in which I've said this,
I don't know what Rachel caught into whatever you guys are using, but I've named them officially,
by the way. Okay, I have the most comfortable pants in the world. The most comfortable pants in the
world. The most comfortable pants in the world. Do what I'm taking that? Can I take that?
It's yours. Do the men? You know what goes good with the joggers is our hoodies, and you know,
I tell you why I walked in last night, to the training. It was last night. That's like,
oh, a jogger, it's wearing a hoodie. And I was like, and that was on the other side of the room,
and I was like, that's a good looking hoodie here alone. And I was like, but it's all black. I was like,
what the frick is he wearing? I was like, he brought a hoodie. I had a different hoodie.
And then I started walking closer, and then you started coming over and I was like, oh,
it's a black on black origin hoodie. Yeah. I was like, that was pretty badass. Yeah.
I keep hoodies for a really long time. Yeah. Like t-shirts. Only they don't wear out as
quick, right? So you can wear out any for a long time. That new hoodie we've developed though out of the
infinity fleece. That's probably going to be a lot. Let's be eating it on the other
than last forever. Uh, one ounce we got. We got supplements. Some joint warfare.
Some creloil. Some discipline. Did you know that joint warfare for origin is the top selling product
across the board when it comes to like all jujitsu, all nutrition, everything we make.
The joint warfare has the greatest impact on humanity than any other product. Makes sense.
It's an unbelievable. It's unbelievable. Yeah. No, people are into it myself included.
My something. And you know, uh, be little was telling me that I love how we call
it be little. When you say that, what it does to my brain, I mean, it's like eating ice cream.
Just say be little one time moving. Yeah. Just no, I was talking to be little. But just now I just caught
that like she little like, okay, it's be period little, right? You know, you sure. Right now I've
just caught the fact that it's like the same is like be little like you're belittling somebody.
Oh, I just caught that right now. I didn't know. I thought that that's why it was so funny. I didn't know.
I just got it. I was so funny. Why did you even think it was funny without knowing that it was
be little because I thought it made him the small. Oh, I'm physically small. Be little. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Like be like because because his name was you could be strong. You could be little exactly.
Or you could be little. So I was like, it's like you tell him basically little.
Yeah. I always thought of it as like be little like I'm a little bit of you.
Dude, you know, the great. I had someone call it to be a camp. We were in the cafeteria like one of the first days
and he comes up to me and he's kind of got his head down a lot of business like hey,
I was like hey, and I thought he's in a say something like it's great to meet you because that's
you know my ego whatever and he's like is be little here.
It's like yes he is. So glad you asked that. Anyways, what were you talking about be little.
Be little. Oh yeah. Well, he just he just said if someone's has to choose between joint warfare
and krill oil. He said if you're doing
if you're trying to recover something joint warfare joint warfare if you're doing maintenance
krill oil because the krill will maintenance other areas as well. So anyways, that's that I
yeah you can I and what's unfortunate for me is when people ask me which one I don't know what to tell
them because I've been taking you know I take them both all the time in pretty heavy doses. So anyways,
also mock train big time mulch train still on the mulch train by the way. Yeah, obviously because
this plenty of mulch to go around over here. Yeah. Well, you think you'll try to fill off the mulch
train ever. I don't see it happening. So Pete and I just had a conversation because we were in a rush to
get down here to do this and we kind of we kind of did a week do we know we we collided we collided
at the chocolate milk station up at the cafeteria and we did and I was like yeah I don't have
time to go down and make a mole right now I'm just going to drink this and he's like yeah there's
something about chocolate milk. I would literally a hundred percent rather have mulch peanut butter
or mulch chocolate mint or chocolate mint or a hundred percent rather have that than
did chocolate milk. And we're going to talk to them 100 percent. You can take and taste
the nasty sugar corn syrup when you drink regular chocolate milk. Yeah, it's like like when you get
used to the milk it's like a kind of drink soda. You drink soda. You drink soda. You
from time to time. You ever drink like Coca Cola? No, I don't drink Coca Cola ever. What do you drink?
You fan. Okay. So you guys want to know if you ever stop drinking soda, if you ever stop drinking
soda and then you go back and have one it tastes so syrupy and sweet. To me that's what
chocolate milk tastes like now it's got this nasty and it's not it's not it doesn't taste sweeter
it tastes more syrupy mulch. It's like if you drink like a coke or a phanta in your case like
right after training. You seem to say instead of like a water. I do get to say like I don't drink
a lot of soda. Okay. It all. So it has to taste my house. Did you taste it? No, there's something about
phanta. Okay. That which one they can't deny. Great pineapple. Great pineapple. Yeah, it's
not all of it. It's undesignated these. Yeah, so like I'm not even kidding once every two months.
My son. So we wouldn't my kids never drink soda and when my son was like six or seven years old
I brought him to the team when I was at trade at and we did like a monster mash which is in the
team's monster mash is when you set up just like obstacle course and then run and then a boat
carry and just set up all these crazy things and they'll just do all these weird stuff and one of
the stations was you had to drink a whole can of coke through a straw and then you had to like
do a sprint over the Burma or whatever and so my son's doing all this stuff with me and he gets
the coke and he's like looks at me like can I drink it and I was like brothers to the teams.
Get drunk. They're drinking quick and so he like drinks it down and as he's drinking it you can
see him like his initial face is like oh and then it just like his face just goes all like
and then he just looks like turns that kind of pale when you could see he was feeling it wasn't
like too much. So he still doesn't drink coke. Yeah man. That's a good no no no so let's
but I think we've got a milk movement in farming to mean what's the milk mix it well you know
is we've got the kids that come because my kids are in junior high and high school and they come
and then they bring their friends in and every time they say me they just like kind of look at
me and yeah for milk they're like and they'll be like that milk is so good. They're like
guys pretty good isn't it hanging around down underneath the bridge drinking milk. Exactly.
What are you guys doing today going to this circle to drink more?
A immersion camp 2019 we sold this one out which was kind of new.
There was actually one of the one of the girls here I was talking to her and she's all fired up
and her brother she's like my brother's so mad he couldn't come and I said oh why couldn't he come
she's like it's sold out. So can you imagine brother sister sister gets his own brother doesn't get to go.
So they did prioritize and execute soon enough. Are we gonna be able to get more people next year?
Yes you know the agreement we had with the contract with the camp limitless to a certain amount
but talking with the owner camp laurel he's like you we can expand more for you guys to make
that happen because they they actually want us here because it's just great for them it's great for us
it's it's it's not like they're taking a care of a bunch of kids let's put it that way.
Cool yeah no that's gonna be a lot of so look for that at origin all those things origin
main.com that's where you can find all that cool origin stuff and support a little something called
America while you're doing it get some also
Jocco has a store similar to jujitsu for operations camp
no curriculars and operations jujitsu offense for combat killing operations. All right there you go
you're too too offense for combat killing operations. So in that same vein
Jocco has a store he named it. Jocco store yeah yeah so it makes more sense not even to me and I've been
in the game for a while anyway Jocco store that's where you can get if you want
these shirts it's a discipline equals freedom. Jocco's head on it says good you know all this stuff
you want to represent represent the game in that way. Awesome American made rash guards
rash guards as well that keep it real. And here's the thing people think you need a rash guard for jujitsu
rash guards are for every lifestyle athlete on planet it's is whatever you're doing whether it's
biking hiking swimming running or if you're passionate base layer if you're John Donnar you
straight up going to a wedding you're not doing that's how yeah he's in the game he's in the game
you know what reminds me let's send my brother John Donnar her some rash guards let's do it
I'd love to get it happen get him in some some you know give him some selection yeah
do you have a little bit of selection better than less all so hoodies and hats whatnot
other stuff on there good stuff cool on top of that there's this podcast which you can subscribe to
you can also subscribe to Pete's podcast which is called Hands and Daylight Hands and Daylight
yeah it's we're on episode thirty nine talking about America work ethic grit jujitsu all of it yeah
I copied you that's all good yeah it's a little bit different but it's like a fifth
under an hour and we talk a lot about business to and getting through tough patches and one
we're dealing with you don't talk about human atrocities for four hours at the time okay so I guess
you didn't get a little bit different then all right you and it's and that's you with your co-host
be little all right uh a also the warrior kid podcast so that one four kids and you'll see
when you listen to it it's for everybody uncle jake has lessons for everybody warrior kid podcast
ask uncle jake also some stories from uncle jake that explain how uncle jake got his value
some life I love the running one yeah yeah you're like looking around you're just like oh snap
yeah that's that's that's that's that's a good one that's a good one um what else
YouTube channel we got a YouTube channel and if you want to see echoes legit videos put that then
then subscribe to the YouTube channel enhanced videos all that stuff get that done YouTube
sure jaco podcast dot com or no jaco podcast channel yeah it's easy to find jaco you
can you have a gift my friend you are a true artist your your work is freaking awesome thanks
proud yeah well that's kind of subject to people's opinion yeah that is it my opinion it's very important
yeah as an as an other artist hey I value it you we've been crumbling it over here yeah
you want to be in the group you got to pick a scab so we could be blood brothers actually jaco
is surprisingly creative maybe now like in the brain kind of thing real simple I get it and that's
cool he's extremely creative he designed a few a few things though like you've designed things like
you he like actually drew it out really like draw no you never seen a draw yeah what I draw
first I would I drew for you I drew on power point yeah we did it on bro yeah I did I
I agree not to I just remember I draw for you you just draw for me some kind of packaging or
something yeah on the packaging you're like no how about like this you drew it out remember you're
like that took like two hours but the concepts are like kind of solid though seems like it's he
understands composition and color theory and lately yeah deep bro I wasn't going to know for
him for real yeah well he does he understands those things and they like red so you got to give
him a you guys be quiet I'm over here innately understanding color theory I'm going to need some time
why don't you think what I walked in that grab this folder and I was like that would make a good
t-shirt or that what I did you understand it or because he understands because whoever did that
I did that the jocco pop I actually we will did that the jocco podcast symbol
is mine yeah I made it yeah and I remember this is what's good about echo I go well you
gonna like do anything to it he goes nope just leave it out it is box with your hand in a microphone
yeah good yeah made sense all simple this I made it's this is part of a sticker that he cut off
and put it right there so we both did that seems like okay that sticker that's not going to
fit on my folder let me cut it off boom fits and you want it to be a shirt Peter Albert's artist
composition one more time also anyway you work in our hearts yeah they are good
it's good anyway also if you're working out you're on the path you're working out yeah I
I have been but I got off the working out tranks I swelbed up too much yeah so now I just drink
more contrages you hooked up too yeah yeah I did I did seriously you realize you can
switch up the workout so you don't you've been teaching me some things about that we're talking
the other day well yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah so we're talking about
on it anyway my kettlebells all pretty pretty much all my new workout stuff like this switching
up from bulking up all of it all on it stuff all of it a kettlebells make cast iron cast iron
cast iron if I'm not mistaken cast yeah yeah but I got the cool ones the primal bells and whatnot
that's the dope one that's a pretty cool process have you ever seen how that works yeah yeah we
when I was in college we myself and my friends built a foundry at the college and what you did
is you start to make those kettlebells you actually start with a wax it's wax and you dip the wax
you you make these little vents like air holes yeah air holes and then you dip the wax and
what's called slurry chr-chr and then you melt the wax out of the slurry and you fill it with
molten metal and it cools and you won't crack it molten molten metal or they say molten
yeah and then you end up with something badass yeah yeah yeah and they balance some it's like
yeah it's a pride it's pretty cool it's one thing to be like okay here's a perfectly round ball
you know and it's all balanced you know because you got to swing that thing around can't be
swinging in one way and then the other way you hurt yourself yeah so they you know they make
the artistic ones but they're still balanced that's deep anyway no I get it no we're just together
now yeah plus you're artistic so you need to artistic kettlebells you're right absolutely right
well they have other cool stuff on there switch up your workout if you want to bulk up while
you're moking up like Pete Roberts you want to trim down and slim down just anyway you know what
you know what I'm saying yeah on it dot com slash jocco get you some good stuff real good stuff
also psychological warfare if you need a little bit of a little bit of an assist during a
moment of weakness you can get psychological warfare on iTunes Google Play MP3 platforms worldwide
did you can hear me talking about how to overcome your moment of weakness yeah jocco white tea
available on Amazon cans tasty tea bags dry hot cold drink and how if you want
the good thing about it is the reason why people want it's because you can definitely
pay a thousand pounds as soon as you have one step yeah you so you could probably move one of those
looms yeah yeah yeah we'll drink some white tea and get that done books way the warrior kid
marks mission and marks mission I've signed at this camp a ton of both books and it's so awesome
to have parents say what they say about their kids after reading those books yeah it's the most
impactful thing I've ever heard about for children that's a bold statement as far as kids
behave your changing in a positive direction give it a try way the warrior kid that's book one
marks mission book two get it for some kids that you know that was pretty cool I've signed a lot of
books here where they're like oh you know I just signed one today hey the kids parents are split
knob he's leaving he's you know he's ten years old it what you can you sign this for him like
yeah I'll sign this thing for him all day long because what's that kid going through get the kid
a book it's going to give them directions going to show them the path and it's a it's a positive path
it's a path that everybody would want their kids to be on and would want any kid to be on I don't
care who you are you're going to want your kids on this path um extreme ownership we talked about
it a bunch today you know Pete Pete talked about how you know you've used it I think you gave
great examples and you've also seen dichotomy leadership dichotomy leadership available for
your to right now if you want first of this do you know I was thinking about like extreme ownership
the book and then that caromy leadership the book you know what that's like it's like you're
watching movie major league you're watching movie no I think I have for a while you're seeing Wesley
Snipes they go on you know Cleveland Indians anyway yes I have so this is what have been Charlie
Sheenie comes out of jail whatever it's like a rag tag group of guys they put together pro team baseball
Cleveland Indians Charlie Sheen comes in he has the fastest fastball ever but it's control like he
you know he's ripping him in the shoulders and yeah you know it turns out he just needs glasses whatever
but so yeah all this speed and power power but his control hasn't come around that's what extreme
ownership is but you get the dichotomy leadership that's the control so I'm saying so you get
X humanish it be got the power now but you need the control too that's the dichotomy leadership tune it in
seems saying that we have the most sensible thing I've heard it's said with reference to a movie
there's a good metaphor you really I just I don't and here's a thing
I'm not gonna say you can't own one without the other what I'm gonna say is this
if you don't own one without the other you're doing yourself at the service because
there are two tools that work together you know I mean you need the both tools
or you're not gonna fully you know become who you want to become as a leader so get the two tools
that's it it's easy agree plus you want to control that fastball yeah yeah man power is good
but the power is good control a speaking of leadership I got a leadership consulting company
it's called echelon front we solve problems through leadership that's what we do we do it all day
every day so I'm in the world someone's got echelon front in their company working
aligning leadership it's me it's life JP to now Dave Burke Flynn Cochrane Mike's a Rally
echelon front calm come and get it also we got the master the next master is
mr006 in San Francisco October 17th and 18th they've all sold out the emergence camp sold out
if you want to come register to extremownership dot com you've been to the master yeah
sum it up nominal sum it up uh open eyes and open ears and I took my team to the master
and it blew my expectations first of all because I needed them to get on the same path I was on
and we used as an excuse to display what we were doing but we so we went there for one reason and we
left with a completely for a different completely different reason and my father and la joe came also
and he took those those skills he's he's the he's the town road commissioner he took those skills he
learned and he's been dealing with the problems for 20 years and those problems he's been dealing
with for 20 years was him and he solved those problems and he's a different person hey yeah that's awesome
that's a great a lot of people do that a lot of people come to the master with their teams
they get everyone aligned in one shot and it's solid and then once you leave you're not on your
own struggling to keep that mindset you got other people back and you up and reinforcing you
so that's mr006 else we got roll call 001 September 21st in Dallas Texas if you want to
come to that you that's of course it's going to sell out to we're getting close
that is for uniform personnel so military law enforcement board of patrol fire fighters paramedics
first responders everywhere come to that again registered extremownership.com and now we have
F overwatch where we are taking companies that need leaders and we're taking the associates
and comrades that we had in special operations and in combat aviation and we are bringing those leaders
into the civilian sector so if you are either a spec ops combat aviation person that is looking
for work after you leave the military or your company that needs leadership go to efoverwatch.com
and until we see you on the mats of justice or at the master or at the roll call or at the
immersion camp in 2019 if you want to continue to roll with us virtually we're on the interwebs
P is at origin bjj on twitter he's at origin usa on instagram and he's at origin
on that phasy double watch and on those platforms echo is echo Charles and i am at jok
work echo anything else but nothing super fun to have you on again thank you both i was you know
little bit nervous about coming on today but i'm glad i did and that you forced me to know
what i really appreciate you invited me back on it means a lot and man just awesome awesome to be
able to share what we're doing with the masses and have you here at camp and you know helping out
to build this movement. stoked to be here and thanks for coming on and I'm sure you're going to be on
again in due course next year at a minimum and okay so lastly obviously thanks everyone in the military
out there making sacrifices every day to literally keep us free and thanks to police law enforcement
correction officers fire fighters board patrol paramedics and all other first responders here at home
thanks for your sacrifices to keep us safe and everyone else out there you know someone at the
immersion camp said that jiu jitsu could seem frustrating because you try things and they just don't
work and you practice and you drill and you try them again and things don't work and it said
to person just said that jiu jitsu can seem frustrating and I said jiu jitsu just doesn't seem
frustrating it is frustrating it is frustrating it's a grind it's hard it's overwhelming it's
infuriating it's irritating and it can also be very disappointing and in all those ways jiu jitsu is just
like life life is going to be hard it's going to be frustrating it's going to be disappointing it's
going to be overwhelming but like those settlers in New England you keep at it and you keep working
and you keep driving and pushing and grinding and then you get a little something you see a little
bit of light you make a little bit of progress and then you dig in and you do it again
and jiu jitsu is an easy and neither is life and that is what makes them both so worth doing
with everything you've got so get out of bed shut off the TV and pose your will on the world
and when you get be down by the world get back up again and get after it
and until next time this is Peter Roberts and echo and jockel out